+ hafizullah amin hafizullah amin date of birth: august 1, 1929   date of death: december 27, 1979 president of afghanistan tenure order: 3th president 
( 2th president of the dra ) took office:  september 1979 – december 1979 predecessor: nur muhammad taraki successor: babrak karmal prime minister of afghanistan tenure order: 6th prime minister
( 2th premier of the dra ) took office:  march 1979 – december 1979 predecessor: mohammed daoud khan successor: babrak karmal

hafizullah amin (august 1, 1929 - december 27, 1979) was the second president of afghanistan during the period of the communist democratic republic of afghanistan. amin tried to broaden his internal base of support and to bring the interest of pakistan and the united states in afghan security. during the 104 days of his own rule, except for one failed military rebellion, no major uprising took place.

 early years 

born in kabul, afghanistan. he gained a bsc in mathematics and physics from the university of kabul before leaving for columbia university in new york where he received his masters degree in 1957 (education science). amin failed his doctoral exams twice which left him feeling bitter towards the americans. 

amin returned to afghanistan in 1965 to join the people's democratic party of afghanistan (pdpa), he became a prominent member of the marxist khalq (people) faction. 

president daoud was still in the besieged palace when amin took command of the coup after he and his comrades were released from the prison.

after the death of mohammed daoud khan in 1978 the pdpa gained power with nur mohammad taraki becoming president of the democratic republic of afghanistan and secretary general of the pdpa while amin and babrak karmal became deputy prime ministers. an attempt to institute marxist-leninist reforms provoked widespread resistance and a number of violent revolts. 

in february 1979 the u.s. ambassador adolph dubs was killed. the khalq faction was gaining political power over the parcham faction, with karmal exiled to europe. amin had gained considerable control by march 1979 and was named prime minister although taraki retained his other posts. 

the unrest continued however and the regime was forced to seek more soviet aid. it was in that meeting between taraki and leonid breznev that the decision of removing amid took place.

afer taraki returned to kabul he requested that amin meet with him. amin agreed to the meeting only if his safety was guaranteed by the soviet ambassador. such assurances were provided, but not in good faith. amin knew however what taraki's intentions were and the demand for his safety being guaranteed by the soviet ambassador was probably a shrewd ploy on the part of amin to mislead taraki. 

being forewarned, amin used the palace guard to take taraki prisoner. on september 14, 1979 amin then took control of the government. a few days later amin's government announced that taraki died of an "undisclosed illness".

president of the republic ( september 1979 – december 1979 )

thumb|flag of the khalq (masses) faction of the people's democratic party of afghanistan and of the democratic republic of afghanistan during hafizullah amin's rule.

amin now assumed leadership and carried out his own purges of the pdpa. attempting to pacify the population, he released a list of some 18,000 people who had been executed and blamed the executions on taraki.

during this period, many afghans fled to pakistan and iran and began organizing a resistance movement to the "atheistic" and "infidel" communist regime backed by the soviets. although the groups organizing in the pakistani city of peshawar would later, after the soviet invasion, be described by the western press as "freedom fighters".

amin began unfinished attempts to moderate what many afghans viewed as an anti-islam regime. promising more religious freedom, repairing mosques, presenting copies of the koran to religious groups, invoking the name of allah in his speeches, and declaring that the saur revolution was "totally based on the principles of islam." yet many afghans held amin responsible for the regime's harshest measures and the soviets, worried about their huge investment in afghanistan might be jeopardized, increased the number of advisers in afghanistan. 

amin worked to broaden his base of support and purged the pdpa of his perceived enemies. his regime was still under pressure from the insurgency in the country and he tried to gain pakistani or american support and refused to take soviet advice. this display of independent nationalism meant that when in december 1979, the soviets began their invasion of afghanistan.

 soviet invasion 
thumb|right|the hq of the soviet 40th army in kabul, afghanistan in 1987. before the invasion it was the presidential palace where amin was killed. photo by mikhail evstafiev

islamic guerrillas in the mountainous countryside harassed the afghan army to the point where the government of president hafizullah amin turned to the soviets for increasingly large amounts of aid. the soviets decided to occupy afghanistan in order to maintain communist power, but were dissatisfied with amin as the afghan leader capable of accomplishing this goal. 

amin feared the soviet troops would be used to depose him. fearing for his survival and uncertain of whom he could trust, he started putting his relatives into positions of power. amin put one of his nephews in charge of the secret police, but that nephew was assassinated. amin moved his headquarters out of kabul in concern for his own safety. 

on december 22, the soviet advisors to the afghani armed forces advise them to undergo maintenance cycles for tanks and other crucial equipment. meanwhile, telecommunications links to areas outside of kabul are severed, isolating the capital. viewing this, amin moves the offices of the president to the dar-ul-aman palace, believing this location to be more defensible during invasion.

five days later, on december 27, elements of the kgb, spetsnaz, and  alpha group, in afghan uniforms storm the presidential place in kabul, taking heavy casualties, killing president hafizullah amin in the process. 

according to the soviet politburo they were only complying with the 1978 treaty of friendship, cooperation and good neighborliness that former president taraki signed. the execution of hafizullah amin was, according to the soviets, the action of the afghan revolutionary central committee. that committee then elected as head of government babrak karmal, who was in exile in moscow.  

the soviet government and press repeatedly referred to amin as a "cia agent", a charge which was greeted with great skepticism in the united states and elsewhere. however, enough circumstantial evidence supporting the charge exists so that it perhaps should not be dismissed entirely out of hand.

 