thumb|300px|map of asia, 1892
the history of asia can be seen as the collective history of several distict peripheral coastal regions, east asia, south asia, and the middle east linked by the interior mass of the eurasian steppe.

the coastal periphery was the home to some of the world's earliest known civilizations, with each of the three regions developing early civilizations around fertile river valleys.  the civilizations in mesopotamia, the indus valley, and china shared many similarities and likely exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel.  other notions such as that of writing likely developed individually in each area.  cities, states and then empires developed in these lowlands.

the steppe region had long been inhabited by mounted nomads, and from the central steppes they could reach all areas of the asian continent.  the earliest known such central expansion out of the steppe is that of the indo-europeans which spread their languages into the middle east, india, and in the tocharians to the borders of china. the northern part of the continent, covering much of siberia was also inaccessible to the steppe nomads due to the dense forests and the tundra.  these areas were very sparsely populated.

the centre and periphery were kept separate by mountains and desserts.  the caucasus, himalaya, karakum desert, and gobi desert formed barriers that the steppe horsemen could only cross with difficulty.  while technologically and culturally the city dwellers were more advanced, they could do little militarily to defend against the mounted hordes of the steppe.  however, the lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound force.  thus the nomads who conquered states in china, india, and the middle east were soon forced to adapt to the local societies.

history by country
history of the middle east
 history of iraq
history of mesopotamia
 history of iran
history of persia
 history of the levant
history of israel
history of jordan
history of lebanon
history of palestine
history of syria
 history of saudi arabia
 history of turkey
history of anatolia

history of south asia
 history of india
history of the republic of india
history of south india
history of assam
 history of pakistan
historical regions of pakistan
history of mehrgarh
history of the indus valley
 history of bengal
history of bangladesh
history of east bengal
history of east pakistan
 history of bhutan
 history of nepal
 history of sri lanka
 history of tibet

history of east asia
 history of china
history of the people's republic of china
history of hong kong
history of macau
history of the republic of china
history of taiwan
 history of japan
 history of korea
history of north korea
history of south korea

history of central asia
 history of afghanistan
 history of kazakhstan
 history of kyrgyzstan
 history of mongolia
 history of uzbekistan
 history of turkmenistan

history of southeast asia
 history of cambodia
 history of indonesia
 history of laos
 history of malaysia
 history of myanmar
 history of the philippines
 history of singapore
 history of thailand
 history of vietnam

