indonesia has a market-based economy in which the government plays a significant role. it owns more than 164 state-owned enterprises and administers prices on several basic goods, including fuel, rice, and electricity. in the aftermath of the financial and economic crisis that began in mid-1997, the government took custody of a significant portion of private sector assets through acquisition of nonperforming bank loans and corporate assets through the debt restructuring process.

background

during the 30 years of president suharto's "new order" government, indonesia's economy grew from a per capita gdp of $70 to more than $1,000 by 1996. through prudent monetary and fiscal policies, inflation was held in the 5%–10% range, the rupiah was stable and predictable, and the government avoided domestic financing of budget deficits. much of the development budget was financed by concessional foreign aid.

in the mid-1980s, the government began eliminating regulatory obstacles to economic activity. the steps were aimed primarily at the external and financial sectors and were designed to stimulate employment and growth in the non-oil export sector. annual real gdp growth averaged nearly 7% from 1987–1997, and most analysts recognized indonesia as a newly industrializing economy and emerging major market.

high levels of economic growth from 1987–1997 masked a number of structural weaknesses in indonesia's economy. the legal system was very weak, and there was and is no effective way to enforce contracts, collect debts, or sue for bankruptcy. banking practices were very unsophisticated, with collateral-based lending the norm and widespread violation of prudential regulations, including limits on connected lending. non-tariff barriers, rent-seeking by state-owned enterprises, domestic subsidies, barriers to domestic trade, and export restrictions all created economic distortions.

the regional financial problems that swept into indonesia in late 1997 quickly became an economic and political crisis. indonesia's initial response was to float the rupiah, raise key domestic interest rates, and tighten fiscal policy. in october 1997, indonesia and the international monetary fund (imf) reached agreement on an economic reform program aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and elimination of some of the country's most damaging economic policies, such as the national car program and the clove monopoly, both involving family members of president suharto. the rupiah failed to stabilize for any significant period of time, however, and president suharto was forced to resign in may 1998. in august 1998, indonesia and the imf agreed on an extended fund facility (eff) under president b.j habibie that included significant structural reform targets. president abdurrahman wahid took office in october 1999, and indonesia and the imf signed another eff in january 2000. the new program also has a range of economic, structural reform, and governance targets.

the effects of the financial and economic crisis were severe. in 1998, real gdp contracted by an estimated 13.7%. the economy bottomed out in mid-1999, and real gdp growth for the year was an anemic 0.3%. inflation reached 77%in 1998 but slowed to 2% in 1999. the rupiah, which had been in the rp 2,400/usd1 range in 1997 reached rp 17,000/usd1 at the height of the 1998 violence, returned to the rp 6,500–8,000/usd1 range in late 1998. it has traded in the rp 6,500–9,000/usd1 range since, with significant volatility. although a severe drought in 1997–1998 forced indonesia to import record amounts of rice, overall imports dropped precipitously in the early stage of the crisis in response to the unfavorable exchange rate, reduced domestic demand, and absence of new investment. although reliable unemployment data are not available, formal sector employment contracted significantly.

as of early 2005, indonesia's economic outlook is more positive. economic growth accelerated to about 5.1% in 2004 and is expected accelerate further in 2005. the gdp per capita has reached pre-crisis levels. growth is driven primarily by domestic consumption, which accounts for roughly three-fourths of indonesia's gross domestic product. the jakarta stock exchange was the best performing market in asia in 2004, up some 42%. problems that continue to put a drag on growth include low foreign investment levels, bureaucratic red tape, and widespread corruption. however, there is very strong optimism with the conclusion of peaceful elections during the year 2004 and the election of the reformist president susilo bambang yudhoyono.

the somewhat positive view of the recent economic(fiscal year 2004-2005) outlook has been dampened recently by couple of factors mainly: the weakening of the rupiah against the us dollar as well as the significant jump in the crude oil price.

oil and minerals sector
indonesia is the only asian member of the organization of petroleum exporting countries (opec) outside of the middle east, and is the only opec member that is a net oil importer. in early 2005, indonesian crude oil and condensate output was 1.07 million barrels per day.  this is a substantial decline from the 1990s, due primarily to aging oil fields and a lack of investment in oil production equipment. in 1999, crude and condensate output averaged 1.5 million barrels (240,000 m³) per day, and in the 1998 calendar year the oil and gas sector, including refining, contributed approximately 9% to gdp. this decline in production since the 1990s has been accompanied by a substantial increase in domestic consumption, about 5.4% per year, leading to an expected us$1.2 billion cost for importing oil in 2005.

the state owns all petroleum and mineral rights. foreign firms participate through production-sharing and work contracts. oil and gas contractors are required to finance all exploration, production, and development costs in their contract areas; they are entitled to recover operating, exploration, and development costs out of the oil and gas produced. according to president susilo bambang yudhoyono, the nation is expected to deplete its crude oil reserves in about 2020.

although minerals production traditionally centered on bauxite, silver, and tin production, indonesia is expanding its copper, nickel, gold, and coal output for export markets. in mid-1993, the department of mines and energy reopened the coal sector to foreign investment, with the result that the leading indonesian coal producer now is a joint venture between u.k. firms bp and rio tinto. total coal production reached 74 million metric tons in 1999, including exports of 55 million tons. the indonesian government hopes to surpass 100 million metric tons of coal production in 2002. two us firms operate three copper/gold mines in indonesia, with a canadian and uk firm holding significant other investments in nickel and gold, respectively. in 1998, the value of indonesian gold production was $1 billion and copper, $843 million. receipts from gold, copper, and coal comprised 84% of the $3 billion earned in 1998 by the mineral mining sector.

investment
since the late 1980s, indonesia has made significant changes to its regulatory framework to encourage economic growth. this growth was financed largely from private investment, both foreign and domestic. u.s. investors dominated the oil and gas sector and undertook some of indonesia's largest mining projects. in addition, the presence of us banks, manufacturers, and service providers expanded, especially after the industrial and financial sector reforms of the 1980s. other major foreign investors included japan, the united kingdom, singapore, the netherlands, hong kong, taiwan, and south korea.

the economic crisis made continued private financing imperative but problematic. new foreign to have the advantages of a large labor force, abundant natural resources and modern infrastructure, private investment in new projects largely ceased during the crisis.

in may 2004, an indonesian court may have compounded the country's troubles attracting foreign investment when it ruled in favor of a petition by indonesian chemical company, tri polyta, that a bond issue be declared illegal and nullified, freeing that company of its obligation to repay its debts.