what is hentai 
recently i was listing to the local radio and two people were trying to find out what hentai was, so the first thing they tried to do was look it up on wikipedia. because the first two paragraphs didn't even say anything about pornographic animation and talk more about what it means in japan they couldn't understand what it means from the wikipedia page. in fact if the entire article was read from the prospective of someone who has no previous knowledge of what hentai is i would say that a number of people would not be able to understand what it means in america. considering that this is the english version of wikipedia i think that the article should be focused on what it does mean in america, pornographic animation. i would like to hear what other people think.new order 20:40, 18 april 2007 (utc)

well considering the fact that english is spoken by more countries than america, i'd say it should be written on what is means in the english-speaking west rather than just the states. but besides that, i'd wholley recommend the rewriting. 24.86.59.67 02:51, 28 april 2007 (utc)

 remove the last tag 

the people who bitched about this article are gone, and no one is "disputing" it.
allen649 02:12, 5 november 2007 (utc)
 i'll dispute that it's accurate. no references provided for anything, even. valrith 22:51, 5 november 2007 (utc)

i'm pretty sure there's no website that just has a history of hentai... other than here, and everyone who is complaining has never actually found anything worthwhile. allen649 00:43, 6 november 2007 (utc)

"history of hentai

the history of what us westerners are commonly calling hentai starts way back during the 1500s during the edo period of japan with the popularity of wood block prints that eventually took not only a sexual turn but another turn depicting surreal sexual fantasies. this was not called hentai, the wood blocks depicting sex were called ukiyo-e and the wood blocks depicting surreal or fantasy were called shunga. originating from two words combined, hen meaning strange or unusual and tai meaning attitude or appearance. the modern definition of hentai in japanese is pervert and is used to describe a person or individual and not magazines or movies with sexual content. the word pervert has a different meaning in japan than it does in the west, you have to remember that there is a huge culture difference between east and west. while the western definition of pervert provokes a negative stereotype way out of the accepted social mainstream to the point of criminal, the definition is not anywhere near as negative in the east. it appears to describe an individual with different tastes with a slightly negative connotation, but not as far out of the mainstream.

the animated or artistic sexual material we are referring to as hentai is referred to as anime or manga in japan. h anime is considered the animated or artistic expression with adult or sexual content. h manga is usually the adult orientated printed version in books or comic book style magazines. because of western influence the h represents the rating of adult content much like our r, m, or x. originally however, this was not the case and h anime had variables such as ecchi which may have softer versions of hentai showing nothing more than a woman’s breasts. even the word ecchi has many various spellings describing milder, or less strong language or actions.

since hentai, or h anime, or h manga is considered artistic the full use of the imagination is acceptable, almost encouraged, including depictions that run against the grain of accepted society and culture, much like the western worlds acceptability of controversial art. this could easily include bukkake or group sex, bukkake being the depicting of a female used to service as many males as possible who then ejaculate on her. this usually occurs in public or in an area with a large number of males either present or available. much like our shock jocks, extreme sexual fantasies can be the norm, depending on the taste. some hentai will concentrate on character development or plot with sex during the story while other variations cater to fetishes up to and including sexual encounters with aliens. the genre of hentai alone is as diverse as the shelves in any bookstore. "

http://hentaihostess.com/hentai_history.html

allen649 00:50, 6 november 2007 (utc)

see? no help. allen649 06:52, 8 november 2007 (utc)

 bishi 

the description in yaoi and yuri could confuse the reader into thinking that bishōnen and bishōjo are contextual to those forms of hentai only and are not just general terms used to describe the sterotype.
jinnai (talk) 04:39, 8 january 2008 (utc)

 both sides of the issue 

anyone want to mention how some people (and by that, i mean, the majority) think hentai is really, really fucked up? if you really want to be comprehensive, that's fine, but this article gives the illusion that hentai is perfectly socially accetpable. (the one reference to japan is not adequate.) and it's not generally considered socially acceptable.

at all.—preceding unsigned comment added by grimmc (talk • contribs) 

do you know of any reliable published sources that support that view? if so, you can add information with citations to such sources. -- donald albury 14:50, 8 january 2008 (utc)

anyway while its not considered normal by some people there isnt really much harm in it, its probably less shocking than porn to most and if anyone comments on it being weird you just say 'its japanese' and people just nod ang go 'aaah, i see' because foreigners are allowed to be weird 172.142.250.251 (talk) 22:01, 11 january 2008 (utc)

mmmm... i wonder... is there any porn material "socially acceptable" by "the majority"??? and what do you mean by "fucked up", and how we'd put it in the article? sspecter (talk) 08:26, 31 january 2008 (utc)

 references 

