the hearst corporation is a large privately-held media conglomerate based in new york city. founded by william randolph hearst as an owner of newspapers, the company's holdings now include a wide variety of media. the hearst family is involved in the ownership and management of the company.

 trustees of william randolph hearst's will (2003) 
under william randolph hearst's will, a common board of thirteen trustees--five family members and eight outsiders--administers the hearst foundation, the william randolph hearst foundation, and the trust that owns (and selects the 21-member board of) the hearst corporation. the foundations shared ownership until tax law changed to prevent this. the present trustees are:
george randolph hearst jr., chairman of hearst corporation and president of the hearst foundation
victor f. ganzi, president and chief executive officer of the corporation
frank a. bennack jr., vice chairman and longtime former president and chief executive of the corporation
william randolph hearst iii, president of the william randolph hearst foundation
john randolph hearst jr., an officer and director of the corporation
virginia hearst randt, daughter of late former chairman randolph apperson hearst
anissa bouadjakdji balson, granddaughter of david whitmire hearst sr.
richard e. deems, former head of hearst magazines, now a consultant
gilbert c. maurer, succeeded deems as head of hearst magazines, then preceded ganzi as executive vice president and chief operating officer under bennack, now a consultant
raymond j. petersen, longtime executive vice president of hearst magazines, retains title but largely inactive
mark f. miller, executive vice president of hearst magazines (retiring late 2005)
john g. conomikes, vice president of corporation, oversees broadcast interests
harvey l. lipton, lawyer and former vice president and secretary of the corporation

the trust dissolves when all grandchildren of william randolph hearst alive at his death have died.

assets
main article: list of assets owned by hearst corporation
a non-exhaustive list of its properties and investments includes:

magazines
 cosmopolitan magazine
 esquire magazine
 good housekeeping
 harper's bazaar
 popular mechanics
 redbook
 town & country

newspapers
 beaumont enterprise
 houston chronicle
 jasper newsboy
 king features syndicate
 laredo morning times
 midland daily news
 san francisco chronicle
 seattle post-intelligencer
 san antonio express-news

television and cable (investments)
 a&e television networks (shared with disney and nbc universal)
 espn (20% shared with disney)
 hearst-argyle
 lifetime television

competitors
condé nast publications

 