thumb|250px|hearst tower, in september 2006
hearst communications, inc. is a privately-held american-based media conglomerate based in the hearst tower in new york city, usa. founded by william randolph hearst as an owner of newspapers, the company's holdings now include a wide variety of media. the hearst family is involved in the ownership and management of the company.

hearst is one of the largest diversified communications companies in the world. its major interests include 15 daily and 49 weekly newspapers, including the houston chronicle and albany times union; as well as interests in an additional 43 daily and 72 non-daily newspapers owned by subsidiary medianews group, which include the denver post and salt lake tribune; nearly 200 magazines around the world, including cosmopolitan and o, the oprah magazine; 28 television stations through hearst television inc. which reach a combined 18% of u.s. viewers; ownership in leading cable networks, including lifetime television, a&e television networks, the history channel and espn; as well as business publishing, internet businesses, television production, newspaper features distribution and real estate. 

trustees of william randolph hearst's will
under william randolph hearst's will, a common board of 13 trustees—five family members and eight outsiders—administers the hearst foundation, the william randolph hearst foundation, and the trust that owns (and selects the 18-member board of) the hearst corporation. the foundations shared ownership until tax law changed to prevent this. as of 2003, the trustees are:
frank a. bennack jr., vice chairman and chief executive of the corporation
anissa bouadjakdji balson, granddaughter of david whitmire hearst sr.
john g. conomikes, vice president of corporation, oversees broadcast interests
ronald j. doerfler, chief financial officer, senior vice president and a board member of hearst corporation
george randolph hearst jr., chairman of hearst corporation and president of the hearst foundation
john randolph hearst jr., an officer and director of the corporation
virginia hearst randt, daughter of late former chairman randolph apperson hearst
william randolph hearst iii, president of the william randolph hearst foundation
harvey l. lipton, lawyer and former vice president and secretary of the corporation
gilbert c. maurer, succeeded deems as head of hearst magazines, then preceded ganzi as executive vice president and chief operating officer under bennack, now a consultant
mark f. miller, former executive vice president of hearst magazines
david j. barrett, president and chief executive officer of hearst-argyle television, inc.
the trust dissolves when all family members alive at the time of hearst's death in august 1951 have died. actuarial tables have put this date at 2042 or 2043.david nasaw, the chief: the life of william randolph hearst (mariner books, 2001).

history

in december 2003, marvel entertainment acquired cover concepts from hearst communications, inc.

nbc universal is considering adding lifetime television to the partnership of a&e television networks.nbcu looks for lifetime stake, mediaweek, june 4, 2009disney, hearst, nbc in talks on cable joint venture, new york times, june 4, 2009disney, hearst, nbc universal talk aetn restructuring, broadcasting & cable, june 3, 2009lifetime could join aetn fold, multichannel news, june 6, 2009

assets

a non-exhaustive list of its properties and investments includes:

magazines
cosmopolitan
country living
esquire
good housekeeping
harper's bazaar
house beautiful
marie claire
o, the oprah magazine
popular mechanics
redbook
seventeen
smartmoney (with dow jones)
town & country
veranda
nat mags

newspapers
albany times union
beaumont enterprise
connecticut post
edwardsville intelligencer
greenwich time
houston chronicle
huron daily tribune
laredo morning times
midland daily news (michigan)
midland reporter-telegram (texas)
the news-times
the advocate (stamford)
plainview daily herald
san antonio express-news
interests in an additional 43 daily and 72 non-daily newspapers owned by medianews group, which include the denver post and salt lake tribune medianews 10-q

weekly newspapers
210sa (tx)
advertiser north (ny)
advertiser south (ny)
ballston journal (ny)
ballston spa pennysaver (ny)
beaumont journal (tx)
bulverde community news (tx)
business express (tx)
cancha (tx)
canyon news (tx)
clifton park north pennysaver (ny)
clifton park south pennysaver (ny)
conexion (tx)
darien news-review (ct)
fairfield citizen-news (ct)
fort sam news leader (tx)
fronteras (tx)
glens falls moneysavers (ny)
greenwich citizen (ct)
hardin county news (tx)
hill country view (tx)
jasper newsboy (tx)
kelly usa observer (tx)
la vibra (tx)
la voz (tx)
lackland talespinner (tx)
latham pennysaver (ny)
marlette leader (mi)
medical patriot (tx)
mid county chronicle (tx)
muleshoe journal (tx)
neighborhood news (tx)
new canaan news-review (ct)
new milford spectrum (ct)
north central news (tx)
north san antonio times (tx)
northwest weekly (tx)
norwalk citizen-news (ct)
orange county news (tx)
pennysaver news (ny)
queensbury moneysaver (ny)
randolph wingspread (tx)
southside reporter (tx)
spa city moneysaver (ny)
the herald (tx)
the weekly (ny)
vassar pioneer times (mi)
west texas country trader (tx)
wesport news (ct) 

television and cable (investments)
 a&e television networks (shared with disney and nbc universal)
 espn (owns 20%; shared with disney, which owns the other 80%)
 hearst television inc. (owner of 26 local television stations; also manages three local television and two local radio stations)
 lifetime entertainment services (joint venture with the walt disney company)

internet
 1up.com
 gametab.com
 gamevideos.com
 mycheats.com
 ugo
 40% of kaango, llc medianews 10-q
 answerology
 kaboodle
 ecrush
 realage
 seattlepi.com (seattle post-intelligencer)

other
 king features syndicate

antitrust allegations
on july 14, 2006, san francisco businessman and real estate investor clint reilly filed a lawsuit against hearst corp. (owner of the san francisco chronicle) and medianews group (owner of the san jose mercury news, contra costa times, marin independent journal, oakland tribune and all other paid-circulation dailies in the bay area), alleging that the two companies have been conspiring to control advertising rates, a violation of antitrust laws.

in november 2006, reilly's attorney presented to u.s. district judge susan illston a letter from hearst senior vice president james asher to medianews president jody lodovic that said the two companies agreed to "offer national advertising and internet advertising sales for their san francisco bay area newspapers on a joint basis, and to consolidate the san francisco bay area distribution networks of such newspapers ..." illston, suggesting she had been misled by the companies when they said they had not been collaborating, issued a 14-page rulingu.s. district court  order re: second application for temporary restraining order, november 28 2006 forbidding hearst and medianews from working together on national advertising sales or distribution.

on december 21, 2006, the san francisco bay guardian and nonprofit media alliance filed suit to make the details of reilly's lawsuit—and medianews and the chronicle's response—public.williamson, kate. san francisco examiner "weekly, nonprofit sue to open records," december 22 2006 as a result of the filing, many documents in the case were voluntarily disclosed by the defendants. the judge allowed redacted versions of two more documents to be released. she kept 17 others under seal. one of the documents unsealed was the deposition of hearst's asher, who says that as of september 2006, his company had recorded cumulative losses of $330 million on its investment in the chronicle,said, carolyn. san francisco chronicle, february 1 2007. ''hearst, medianews talks included possible sale of chronicle" which it acquired in mid-2000. he said hearst proposed selling the chronicle to medianews, but medianews didn't offer enough money. asher also said hearst and medianews have discussed working together for years. although the trial was scheduled to start monday, april 30 2007 in u.s. district court in san francisco,san francisco examiner "medianews, hearst trial set to proceed," february 9 2007. the parties announced on april 25 2007 that a settlement had been reached.

