nl:irak/geschiedenis

 ancient times 
for most of historic time, the city and empire of babylon occupied parts of the present time region of iraq. there were many dynasties and kingdoms which ruled babylon and other cities in the tigris river basin.

hammurabi (1792 bc-1750 bc) was the sixth and best known of the amorite dynasts.

nebuchadrezzar i (nabu-kudurri-usur; c. 1119 bc-c. 1098 bc) was the best known of the 2nd dynasty of isin.

once known as mesopotamia, iraq was the site of flourishing ancient civilizations, including the sumerian, babylonian, and parthian cultures. muslims conquered iraq in the seventh century a.d. in the eighth century, the abassid caliphate established its capital at baghdad, which became a frontier outpost on the ottoman empire.

at the end of world war i, iraq became a british-mandated territory. when it was declared independent in 1932, the hashemite family, which also ruled jordan, ruled as a constitutional monarchy. in 1945, iraq joined the united nations and became a founding member of the arab league. in 1956, the baghdad pact allied iraq, turkey, iran, pakistan, and the united kingdom, and established its headquarters in baghdad.

gen. abdul karim qasim took power in july 1958 coup, during which king faysal ii and prime minister nuri as-said were killed, and declared a republic. qasim ended iraq's membership in the baghdad pact in 1959. qasim was assassinated in february 1963, when the arab socialist renaissance party (ba'ath party) took power under the leadership of gen. ahmad hasan al-bakr as prime minister and col. abdul salam arif as president.

nine months later, arif led a coup ousting the ba'ath government. in april 1966, arif was killed in a plane crash and was succeeded by his brother, gen. abdul rahman mohammad arif. on july 17, 1968, a group of ba'athists and military elements overthrew the arif regime. ahmad hasan al-bakr re-emerged as the president of iraq and chairman of the revolutionary command council (rcc). in july 1979, bakr resigned, and his chosen successor, saddam hussein, assumed both offices.

territorial disputes with iran led to an inconclusive and costly eight-year war, the iran-iraq war (1980-1988), eventually devastating the economy. iraq declared victory in 1988 but actually achieved a weary return to the status quo antebellum. the war left iraq with the largest military establishment in the gulf region but with huge debts and an ongoing rebellion by kurdish elements in the northern mountains. the government suppressed the rebellion by using weapons of mass destruction on civilian targets, including a mass chemical weapons attack on the city of halabja that killed several thousand civilians.

in august 1990 iraq seized kuwait, but was expelled by us-led, un coalition forces during january-february 1991 (see gulf war). the victors did not occupy iraq, however, thus allowing the regime to stay in control. following kuwait's liberation, the un security council (unsc) required iraq to scrap all weapons of mass destruction and long-range missiles and to allow un verification inspections. un trade sanctions remain in effect due to incomplete iraqi compliance with relevant unsc resolutions.

on august 6 1990 the u.n. security council adopted resolution 661 which imposed stringent economic sanctions on iraq, providing for a full trade embargo, excluding medical supplies, food and other items of humanitarian necessity, these to be determined by the security council sanctions committee. iraq is allowed under the un oil-for-food program (resolution 986) to export $5.2 billion (usd) of oil every 6 months with which to purchase these items to sustain the civilian population. 30% of the proceeds are redirected to a war reparations account.

the sanctions have been amended several times since 1990, although effectively they remain in full.

the un coalition enforces no-fly zones in southern and northern iraq to protect iraqi citizens from attack by the regime and a no-drive zone in southern iraq to prevent the regime from massing forces to threaten or again invade kuwait. 

