hergé is the pen name of the belgian comics writer and artist georges remi (may 22 1907 - march 3 1983). "hergé" is the the french pronunciation of "r.g.", the reverse of his initials. his best-known and most substantial work is the adventures of tintin, which he wrote and illustrated beginning from 1929. his death in 1983 left the twenty-fourth tintin adventure, tintin and alph-art, unfinished. his work remains a strong influence on comics, particularly in europe.

the notable qualities of the tintin stories include their vivid humanism, a realistic feel produced by meticulous and wide-ranging research, and hergé's ligne claire ("clear line") drawing style distinctive for its clean delineation and the absence of shading.

 childhood and early career 

georges remi was born in 1907 to alexis and elisabeth remi, a middle-class couple living in brussels, belgium. his four years of primary schooling coincided with world war i (1914 - 1918), during which brussels was occupied by germany. georges, who displayed an early affinity for drawing, filled the margins of his earliest schoolbooks with doodles of the german invaders. except for a few drawing lessons which he would later take at ecole saint-luc, he never had any formal training in the visual arts.

like many other catholic boys, georges joined the boy scouts, visiting many countries in europe during summer camps. his subsequent comics work would be heavily influenced by the ethics of the scouting movement, as well as these early travel experiences.

on finishing school in 1925, georges worked at the catholic newspaper le xxe siècle. the following year, he published his first cartoon series, the adventures of totor, in the scouting magazine le boy-scout belge. in 1928, he was put in charge of producing material for the le xxe siècle'''s new weekly supplement for children, le petit vingtième. he began illustrating the adventures of flup, nénesse, poussette, and cochonnet, a strip written by a member of the newspaper's sports staff, but soon became dissatisfied with this series. he decided to create a comic strip of his own, which would adopt the recent american innovation of using speech balloons to depict words come out of the characters' mouths. tintin in the land of the soviets, by "hergé", appeared in the pages of le petit vingtième on january 10, 1929, and ran until may 8, 1930.

in january 1930, hergé introduced quick and flupke, a new comic strip about two street urchins from brussels, in the pages of le petit vingtième. for many years, hergé would continue to produce this less well-known series in parallel with his tintin stories. in june, he began the second tintin adventure, tintin in the congo (then a belgian colony), followed by tintin in america and cigars of the pharoah.

in 1932, he married germaine kieckens, the secretary of the directory of the le xxe siècle. they had no children, and would eventually divorce in 1975.

the early tintin adventures each took about a year to complete, upon which they were released in book form by the casterman publishing house. hergé would continue to revise these stories in subsequent editions, including a later conversion to colour. however, he also expressed embarrassment over the many ill-informed and prejudiced views expressed in these works. an infamous scene in tintin in the congo had tintin giving a geography lesson to native students in a missionary school. "my dear friends," exclaimed tintin, "today i am going to talk to you about your country: belgium!" in a later edition, the scene was changed into an arithmetic lesson.

hergé reached a watershed with the blue lotus, the fifth tintin adventure. he had mentioned at the close of the previous tintin strip, cigars of the pharoah, that tintin's next adventure would bring him to china. father gosset, the chaplain to the chinese students at the university of louvain, wrote to hergé urging him to be sensitive about what he wrote about china. hergé agreed, and in the spring of 1934 gosset introduced him to chang chong-chen, a young sculpture student at the brussels académie des beaux-arts. the two young artists quickly became close friends, and chang introduced hergé to chinese history, culture, and the techniques of chinese art. as a result of this experience, hergé would strive in the blue lotus, as well as subsequent tintin adventures, to be meticulously accurate in depicting the places which tintin visited. as a token of appreciation, he added a fictional "chang" to the blue lotus, a young chinese boy who meets and befriends tintin.

as another result of his friendship with chang, hergé became increasing aware of the problems of colonialism, in particular the japanese empire's advances into china. the blue lotus contains a bold anti-imperialist message, contrary to the prevailing view in the west which was sympathetic to japan and the colonial enterprise. it drew sharp criticism, including a protest by japanese diplomats to the belgian foreign ministry, but the passage of time has since vindicated hergé's views.

at the end of his studies in brussels, chang returned home to china, and hergé lost contact with him during the invasion of china by japan and the subsequent civil war. more than four decades would pass before the two friends would meet again.

 world war ii 

the second world war broke out on september 1, 1939 with the nazi invasion of poland. hergé interrupted tintin's adventures in the middle of the land of the black gold, as he was mobilized as a reserve lieutenant. by the summer of 1940, belgium had fallen to germany with the rest of continental europe.le petit vingtième, in which tintin's adventures had hitherto been published, was shut down as a result of the nazi occupation. hergé accepted an offer to produce a new tintin strip in le soir, brussels' leading french daily, which had been appropriated as the mouthpiece of the occupation forces. the land of the black gold, a story with anti-fascist overtones, had to be left unfinished. instead, hergé launched into a new story, the crab with the golden claws.

during the war, two factors conspired to produce a revolution in hergé's style. firstly, paper shortages forced tintin to be published in a daily three or four-frame strip, rather than two full pages every week which had been the practice on le petit vingtième. in order to create tension at the end of each strip rather than the end of each page, hergé had to introduce more frequent gags and faster-paced action. secondly, hergé moved the focus of tintin's adventures away from current affairs to avoid controversy, turning to stories with an escapist flavour: the shooting star is about an expedition to a meteorite, and comes closer to science fiction than any other tintin adventure; the secret of the unicorn and red rackham's treasure are about a treasure hunt; and the seven crystal balls and prisoners of the sun are about an ancient inca curse. as a result, the tintin stories from this period feature more detailed characterization - captain haddock and professor calculus, tintin's two most memorable supporting characters, were introduced at this time - and a more timeless appeal. in reprint, they have proven to be the most popular of tintin's adventures.

in 1943, hergé met edgar pierre jacobs, another comics artist, whom he hired to help revise the early tintin albums. jacob's most significant contribution would be his redrawing of the costumes and backgrounds in the revised edition of king ottokar's sceptre. he also began collaborating with hergé on a new tintin adventure, the seven crystal balls.

 postwar troubles 

the occupation of brussels ended on september 3, 1944. tintin's adventures were interrupted toward the end of the seven crystal balls, as the allied authorities shut down le soir. during the chaotic post-occupation period, hergé was arrested four times by different groups. he was publicly accused of being a nazi sympathizer, a claim which was largely unfounded: the tintin adventures published during the war were scrupulously free of politics, the only dubious point occurring in the shooting star, which showed a rival scientific expedition flying the american flag. in fact, the stories published before the war had been unequivocally critical of fascism; most prominently, king ottokar's sceptre showed tintin working to defeat a thinly-veiled allegory of the anschluss, germany's takeover of austria. nevertheless, like other former employees of the nazi-controlled press, hergé found himself barred from newspaper work. he spent the next two years working with jacobs, as well as a new assistant, alice devos, adapting many of the early tintin adventures into colour.

tintin's exile ended on september 6, 1946. the publisher and wartime resistance fighter raymond leblanc provided the financial support and anti-nazi credentials to launch tintin magazine with hergé. the weekly publication featured two pages of tintin's adventures, beginning with the remainder of the seven crystal balls, as well as other comic strips and assorted articles. it became highly successful, with circulation surpassing 100,000 every week.

tintin had always been credited as simply "by hergé", without mention of edgar pierre jacob and hergé's other assistants. as jacob's contribution to the production of the strip increased, he began demanding a joint credit. hergé refused, ending their hitherto fruitful collaboration. jacob went on to produce his own comics for tintin magazine, including the widely-acclaimed blake and mortimer''.