{{to do #history of judah needs expansion
rewrite as a history article, not a biblical apologestics article
creates separate "timeline article for holy land"}}
50px|archive
archives*archive 1*archive 2
ancient egyptian domination
the section titled ancient egyptian domination is very confusing.  it starts out as if it is going to be an attempt to reconcile the bible with secular history, a very interesting topic on which many people have written many volumes, but today (11/06/2008) it is just a list of events in secular egyptian history with no explanation how this might fit into the biblical account or how it might relate to the ancient hebrews.  it might as well stay on the pages about egypt, no reason to copy it to the pages about israel.  -erinhowarth (talk) 05:11, 7 november 2008 (utc)

the ethiopian source mentioned

i have deleted the mention of the ethiopian source as it is supposed by most scholars to have been medieval in composition (between 1225 and 1322), not classical (the period of ancient greece and rome). john d. croft (talk) 06:10, 18 november 2008 (utc)

 implications of the newly discovered ostracon 

under the section entitled #non-biblical confirmation there is a discussion of minimalism and the following sentence:

"for example, philip davies shows how the canonical biblical account can only have been composed for a people with a long literate tradition such as found only in late persian or early hellenistic times, and argues that accounts of earlier periods are largely reconstructions based mainly upon oral and other traditions.[7]" 

if it is true, as i added a bit further up, that: 
"recently, however, (november 2008), archaeologists from hebrew university have discovered a 3000 year old ostracon with five lines of hebrew text written in proto-canaanite script at the elah fortress at khirbet qeiyafa. carbon-14 dating puts this ostracon at the time of king david and the united kingdom, and the location is in the area where, according to the bible, david slew goliath." [5][6]   wouldn't davies argument be thrown out of the window in respect to the bible?  if the ostracon is 3000 years old, it would demonstrate that the biblical jews did not have to rely on oral traditions but in fact were writing from 1000bc on....  --tundrabuggy (talk) 00:50, 28 november 2008 (utc)

the ostracon certainly weakens the theory that ancient judah had no literate class until the 7th century, but... . davies is actually referring to, and attacking, the thesis that the j document of the bible was composed in judah in the time of solomon, as a result (or product) of a hypothetical solomonic golden age. i can't recall offhand who put this idea forward, but it was popular around the middle of the 20th century. then in the 1970s scholars pointed out that there was no actual evidence of this golden age. davies is saying that there's not even evidence of literacy - a pretty standard line, and well within the archaeological evidence - it's a fact that there's no evidence of literacy for judah in the 10th century or for a few hundred years thereafter. the ostracon is therefore in the position of a single swallow in relation to summer (as in "one swallow does not make a summer") - it's intriguing, but won't be enough to establish that literacy was widespread or that the solomonic golden age was a reality. pico (talk) 14:20, 2 december 2008 (utc)

 pico, thanks for your thoughtful reply.  it strikes me though, that one can no longer say as you do "it's a fact there's no evidence of literacy for judah in the 10th century..." when the ostracon is from that time and place & contains 5 lines of text including the roots of the words "judge", "slave" and "king"?  it doesn't really matter if literacy was widespread or not, since the issue is whether the history was written or orally handed down.  often in the past it was only the elite who were literate. however, it does speak to whether there was possibly a written record upon which the bible is based or an oral tradition only, as a written record is much less likely to morph. if you will pardon the pun, the swallow analogy doesn't fly for a couple of reasons. first, the birds were clearly there from the start ...ie the ostracon was found in place... & second, one bird is all that is necessary for proof.  literacy is rather like pregnancy.  either you are or you ain't. ;) tundrabuggy (talk) 04:09, 3 december 2008 (utc)

yes, the evidence is slowly accumulating that there was a literate society in the southern judean hill country in the 10th century, and possibly a little earlier (i think the tel zayit stone or whatever it's called qualifies). if someone wrote that ostracon, then someone else was intended to read it (a difference from the tel zayit inscription, which may never have been intended for reading).  still, i'd like to see some considered analysis by the experts, and i don't expect that in the immediate future. lots of digging and studying still to do :). pico (talk) 06:52, 3 december 2008 (utc)

i will have plenty to say on this article in the near future, as a cursory read reveals a mess of minimalist pov-pushing. quite frankly this article has made me extremely angry (more details to follow). i just wanted to add this point: how the hell can anyone claim a lack of literature in this region around the 10th c when just up the road in ebla they find thousands of tablets dated to half a millenia before?--fimustauri (talk) 13:33, 23 january 2009 (utc)
it may someday be an important find but it's too early to tell. the newspaper article says no translation yet and nothing about any specific words.  the second reference is no longer active so i can't tell what it says. at this time a pot shard proves nothing much about a literate society. nitpyck (talk) 07:06, 25 march 2009 (utc)

was that ostrocon for sure hebrew? phoenician and hebrew are incredibly similar as far as known.
the hebrew group is known for taking the opposite position of finkelstein.
--periergeia (talk) 00:00, 11 june 2009 (utc)

 chronological precision 

i have a few problems with the line 
from then on, the chronology can only roughly be given in approximate dates for most events, until about the 9th century bce.
this is in the "egyptian expreience" section. it seems to suggest that all of the dates given before are "firm", when in fact they are disputed in so many different ways. could someone re-write this, either taking out the implication of the certainty of the earlier dates, or specifying which chronology is being cited.--fimustauri (talk) 09:44, 19 march 2009 (utc)

archeologist claims proof of israelites leaving egypt and entering canaan
something interesting that i just found. today, archeologist prof' adam zertal revealed what he thinks could be proof that the ancient israelis left egypt and entered canaan around the 13th century bce. basically in the last 20 years he found 5 huge foot-shaped sites that had been erected in the around -1200 and lasted 400 years and were used as religious places. this is supposed to corroborate details of the biblical account. see here: article in hebrew from ynetbenjil (talk) 15:10, 6 april 2009 (utc)

further reading

the suggestion for further reading attached to this article is a joke, and directly misleading.

nplemche  —preceding unsigned comment added by nplemche (talk • contribs) 17:50, 15 april 2009 (utc) 

and they're gone. we should have a handful of recent books giving different perspectives, what do you suggest? i also zapped 3 of the links, but there must be a couple that we can add. dougweller (talk) 18:40, 15 april 2009 (utc)