 a request for help 

i know a lot of people are watching this article, but i seem to be the only one editing it. i'm pretty convinced that it's not quite so perfect as it could be. if you-all don't want to actually edit in it, perhaps you have some suggestions as to how it could be improved - new sections that could be added, existing ones slimmed down, emphasis shifted, etc etc?  please. pico (talk) 06:46, 28 january 2011 (utc)
pico, i have deliberately held back from reopening our dispute while i was involved in an unrelated arbcom case. with that winding down, i will be ready again to engage at length after reviewing your edits since last month, which will happen real soon now. i suspect, based on past history, that the unreviewed edits will create many opportunities for comment and interaction. i think it would be wise for us to accept lord roem as mediator as per his comment above, and proceed apace. jjb 15:04, 28 january 2011 (utc)
sure, if you feel there's some problem that needs to be resolved, go ahead. pico (talk) 02:55, 29 january 2011 (utc)

 biassed perspective 

i'm more than a little put off by the extremely biassed and frankly insulting language and references used in the sources section. the author appears to have chosen a cheeky quote form his favorite bible critic and slapped it onto wikipedia as accepted fact. a vibrant variety of scholarly opinions, let alone the wealth of jewish scholarship on the subject are ignored. this must be changed.  — preceding unsigned comment added by bennyp (talk • contribs) 12:43, 6 june 2011 (utc) 

where does one even begin to comment on an article which so flagrantly dispenses with the wikipedia dictum of neutral pov? granted that the history of israel and judah is a controversial issue because of its religious and ethnic implications, the author does not even acknowledge the diversity of scholarly opinion on this issue, let alone acknowledge that the biblical account may bear a closer resemblance to historical events than the guesswork of modern historians. the authorial style is clearly polemic. in any article on this subject, there is an editorial responsibility to acknowledge the diversity of opinion on the subject, including also that of the copenhagen school as well as more conservative scholars. instead there is repetitively a presentation of a supposed consensus with language such as "modern scholars see..." and "the new understanding is...", where this is only the consensus of the most extreme of revisionist opinion, e.g. rendsberg, grabbe, lemche. clearly, indulging in an edit war is pointless, but i'm inclined to think that this article is a case for intervention by the wikipedia moderators. marcuscole12 (talk) 13:27, 9 september 2011 (utc)

 disruptive editing by tritomex 

can anyone who's familar with the rules and procedures explain to tritomex that his editing is disruptive and what the consequences of that will be? know the way, show the way and go the way and all that. martijn meijering (talk) 13:08, 28 august 2011 (utc)

tritomex is emotional, but he's sincere. the tricky bit is controlling one's emotional reactions and approaching the project (i mean wikipedia) as one in which everyone shares, regardless of their personal perspective and background. i think tritomex will do this if we treat him with respect.

i've had some exchanges with tritomex on our respective personal talk pages. i'll paste these here, as they relate to the article:

me to tritomex: hi. rather than edit-war, it would be better if you took you concerns to the talk page. my problem, by the way, isn't the content of what you're trying to say, but a feeling that it's a level of detail we can't support in this article. pico (talk) 06:10, 28 august 2011 (utc)

tritomex to me: hi pico, i do not see any reason why basic archeological findings regarding ancient israel and judah shouldn't be mentioned at the site dedicated solely to this subject.considering the claim that no or little archeological evidence was found regarding judah,it is, as you know, an incorrect claim.the 