sv:hypnos
the american psychological association division of 
psychological hypnosis begins its definition of 
hypnosis, "a procedure during which a health 
professional or researcher suggests that a client, patient, 
or subject experience changes in sensations, perceptions, 
thoughts, or behavior." any definition is necessarily vague, as the underlying mechanism is little understood. 
some theories view hypnosis as an altered state of 
consciousness, others as a type of focused attention. psychologists have recently researched hypnosis and found a strong correlation between the ease of  putting someone in a state of 'hypnosis' and their level of suggestibility.  

many religious and cultural rituals contain many 
similarities with techniques used for hypnotic induction 
and induce similar states in their participants.  
scientists first became involved in hypnosis around 1770, 
when dr. franz mesmer started investigating an effect he 
called 'animal magnetism' or 'mesmerism' (the latter name 
still remaining popular today.) the evolution of mesmer's ideas and practices led to james braid's (1795-1860) to use the terms hypnosis and hypnotism in 1842.  sigmund freud briefly used hypnosis for treating patients, but ended up rejecting it as a useful 
treatment.

hypnosis has been used with variable success for hundreds 
of applications, including entertainment, analgesia and 
psychoanalysis. generally, under hypnosis people become 
more susceptible to suggestion, causing changes in the way 
they feel, think, and behave, although contrary to popular 
belief they do still remain in control of their actions. 
this suggestibility has led some psychologists to believe that a state of hypnosis doesn't actually exist, but strong social expectations are being played out by the person who believes that they are in a state of hypnosis.

hypnosis also generally stimulates a feeling of relaxation, 
and this has helped the development of it in to a 
therapy--hypnotherapy--although some of the treatments 
practiced, such as regression, are viewed by some with 
scepticism. when a subject is put through the process of regression it is claimed that they may invent false memories due to the social expectation placed on them. therefore, these memories can not be held as reliable.

hypnosis is usually brought on by a hypnotist carrying out 
an induction procedure. different people respond more or 
less successfuly to suggestion. some people do seem able to 
display 'enhanced functioning', such as the suppression of 
pain, under hypnosis. however studies suggest that these 
qualities are not exclusive to hypnosis, and it is the 
drama and fantasizing that encourages the behaviour.

