de:hypnosesv:hypnosnl:hypnose
hypnosis, as defined by the american psychological association division of 
psychological hypnosis, is "a procedure during which a health 
professional or researcher suggests that a client, patient, 
or subject experience changes in sensations, perceptions, 
thoughts, or behavior." any definition is necessarily vague, as the underlying mechanism is little understood. 
some theories view hypnosis as an altered state of 
consciousness, others as a type of focused attention. psychologists have recently researched hypnosis and found a strong correlation between the ease of  putting someone in a state of 'hypnosis' and their level of suggestibility.   

hypnosis has further been described as "the suspension of the critical factor" (although this is not a scientific description) which expands on the idea of "increased suggestibility". a person who claims to be hynontized sometimes appears to accept as true statements that they would normally reject. for example, statments such as "you have forgotten your name" would not normally be accepted, but under hypnosis people do claim that they do not know their own name. it appears as if the hypnotized subject accepts the authority of the hypnotist over their own experience. when asked afterwards some subjects appear to be genuinely unable to recall the incident, while others would say that they had known the hypnotist was wrong but at the time it had seemed easier just to go along with his instructions. some hypnotists would claim that this showed the difference between a deep and a shallow hypnotic trance while sceptics would question the validity of the demonstration.

those who practice hypnosis claim the hypnotic state is fairly common and in some ways cannot be distinguished from intense concentration when awareness of one's surroundings is lost. they quote as an example the experience, when driving, of suddenly finding oneself much further down the road without any memory of driving the intervening distance. similarly, when a person is watching television and focuses so intently on the prgramme that he/she ceases to be aware of the sides of the screen.

both these descriptions suggest the nature of hypnosis although any definition offered is necessarily vague and unscientific in description.   

experienced hypnotists claim that they can hypnotize almost anyone with the exception of the very young, the very elderly and people with a very low iq, particularly those with an inability to concentrate. intoxicated people would also prove very difficult. they also claim it is a myth that people with strong will power cannot be hypnotized, as they claim these generally make the best subjects. hypnotism depends upon the cooperation of the hypnotist and the subject; when a person with strong will power decides to cooperate with a hypnotist, hypnosis can occur.

alternatively, since hypnosis does depend on cooperation, no one can really be hypnotized against their will. being a hypnotist is not a source of power over other people.

many religious and cultural rituals contain many 
similarities with techniques used for hypnotic induction 
and induce similar states in their participants.  
scientists first became involved in hypnosis around 1770, 
when dr. franz mesmer started investigating an effect he 
called 'animal magnetism' or 'mesmerism' (the latter name 
still remaining popular today.) the evolution of mesmer's ideas and practices led james braid (1795-1860) to coin the term and develop the procedure known as  hypnosis in 1842. sigmund freud briefly used hypnosis for treating patients, but ended up rejecting it as a useful 
treatment.

hypnosis has been used with variable success for hundreds 
of applications, including entertainment, analgesia and 
psychoanalysis. generally, people under hypnosis become 
more susceptible to suggestion, causing changes in the way 
they feel, think, and behave, although contrary to popular 
belief they do still remain in control of their actions. 
this suggestibility has led some psychologists to believe that a state of hypnosis doesn't actually exist, but strong social expectations are being played out by the person who believes that they are in a state of hypnosis.

hypnosis also generally stimulates a feeling of relaxation, 
and this has helped its development into a 
therapy - hypnotherapy - although some of the treatments 
practiced, such as regression, are viewed by some with 
scepticism. when a subject is put through the process of regression it is claimed that they may invent false memories due to the social expectation placed on them. these memories cannot therefore be held to be reliable.

hypnosis is usually brought on by a hypnotist carrying out 
an induction procedure. different people respond more or 
less successfuly to suggestion. some people do seem able to 
display 'enhanced functioning', such as the suppression of 
pain, under hypnosis. however, studies suggest that these 
qualities are not exclusive to hypnosis, and it is the 
drama and fantasizing that encourages the behavior.

