a new page based on the new template is being worked on at indonesia/temp, please make any changes you want to make on that page, this page is temporarily "frozen".

de:indonesieneo:indoneziofr:indonésie
a country in southeast asia. indonesia is the largest archipelago of the world, between asia and australia, and between the indian ocean and the pacific ocean. indonesia achieved independence from the netherlands in 1949.  indonesia is the fourth largest country in population after china, india, and the united states. the capital is jakarta. indonesia has the largest muslim population of the world. the official language is bahasa indonesia.

current issues include: implementing imf-mandated reforms of the banking sector, effecting a transition to a popularly elected government after years of rule by dictators, addressing charges of cronyism and corruption among the chinese-dominated business class, dealing with alleged human rights violations by the military, and resolving growing pressures for some form of autonomy or independence in certain regions such as aceh and irian jaya. on 30 august 1999 a referendum for independence was overwhelmingly approved by the people of east timor. concurrence followed by indonesia's national legislature and the independent status of east timor was formally established on may 20, 2002. indonesia has a long history of unofficial persecution of chinese and christians.

the indonesian economy stabilized in 1999, following the sharp contraction and high inflation of 1998. by following tight monetary policy, the government reduced inflation from over 70% in 1998 to 2% in 1999. although interest rates spiked as high as 70% in response to the monetary contraction, they fell rapidly to the 10% to 15% range. the economy stopped its free-fall as gdp showed some growth in the second half of 1999, although gdp for the year as a whole showed no growth. the government managed to recapitalize a handful of private banks and has begun recapitalizing the state-owned banking sector. new lending, however, remains almost unavailable as banks continue to be wary of issuing new debt in an environment where little progress has been made in restructuring the huge burden of outstanding debts. imf payments were suspended late in 1999 as the result of evidence that a private bank had illegally funneled payments it received from the government to one of the political parties. the government has forecast growth of 3.8% for fy00/01. the spread of sectarian violence and continuing dissatisfaction with the pace of bank and debt restructuring will make it difficult for indonesia to attract the private investment necessary to achieve this goal.

 major islands

from the cia world factbook 2000.

 history
 geography
 people
 government
 economy
 communications
 transportation
 military
 transnational issues
 persecution_of_christians