the republic of indonesia, world's largest archipelago, is located between the south east asian peninsula and australia, between the indian and pacific oceans. indonesia borders malaysia on the island of borneo (kalimantan in bahasa indonesia), papua new guinea on the island of new guinea (irian in bahasa indonesia) and east timor on the island of timor.

republik indonesia
flag of indonesia
indonesia coat of arms
(in detail)
(full size)
national motto: bhinneka tunggal ika (old javanese: unity in diversity)
image:locationindonesia.png
official language            bahasa indonesia
capital                      jakarta
president                megawati sukarnoputri
area - total:  - % water:ranked 15th  1,919,440 km²  4.85%                
population 
 - total (2003): 
 - density:                  ranked 4th
 234,893,453  
 119/km² 
independence
 - declared:
 - recognised:                   from the netherlands
august 17, 1945
december 27, 1949
currency:                     rupiah
time zone:                    utc +7 to utc +9
national anthem:              indonesia raya
internet tld:.id
calling code62

 history 
main article: history of indonesia

under influence of buddhism, several kingdoms formed on the islands of sumatra and java from the 7th to 14th century. the arrival of arab traders later brought islam, which became the dominant religion.

when the europeans came in the early 16th century, they found a multitude of small states. these were vulnerable to the europeans, who were in pursuit of dominating the spice trade. in the 17th century, the dutch emerged as the most powerful of the europeans, ousting the british and portuguese (except for timor). 

after the dutch east india company was liquidated, its possesions in indonesia were taken over by the dutch government. 

during world war ii, japan invaded and occupied most of the important islands.  after japanese occupation ended in 1945, the indonesians declared independence, led by sukarno. the dutch finally accepted in 1949, and sukarno became the country's first president.

after sukarno's autocratic rule was almost overthrown, army leader suharto became president in 1968. suharto enriched himself, but the nation grew poorer, and he was forced to step down after massive demonstrations in 1998.

in the period of 1998 to 2001, the country had four presidents.

the country currently suffers from internal economic, political, and religious struggles, and several regions are striving for independence (aceh, irian jaya).

 politics 
main article: politics of indonesia

executive power lies with the president and his/her advisers. the indonesian parliament is bi-cameral, consisting of the people's congress and the people's representative assembly, each elected for 5-year terms. 

 provinces 
main article: provinces of indonesia

currently, indonesia has 30 provinces, 2 special territories and 1 capital city territory.  the provinces are subdivided in districts, which are in turn split up in sub-districts and municipalities.  the provinces are:

bali,
bangka-belitung,
banten,
bengkulu,
central java,
central kalimantan,
central sulawesi, 
east java,
east kalimantan,
east nusa tenggara,
north sumatra,
gorontalo,
jambi, 
lampung, 
maluku, 
north maluku, 
north sulawesi,
north sumatra,
papua (irian jaya),
riau,
south east sulawesi,
south kalimantan,
south sulawesi,
west irian jaya,
west java,
west kalimantan,
west nusa tenggara,
west sumatra

the special territories (daerah istimewa) are aceh (or nanggroe aceh darussalam) and yogyakarta.  the capital city territory is jakarta.

riau kepulauan is expected to be soon split off as a separate province from riau.

 geography 
main article: geography of indonesia

thumb|right|map of indonesia

indonesia's 17,000 islands (ca. 6,000 are inhabited) are scattered around the equator, giving the country a tropical climate. the largest islands are java, where about half of the population lives, sumatra, borneo (partially malaysian), irian jaya (western half of new guinea) and sulawesi.

its location on the edges of tectonic plates means indonesia is frequently hit by earthquakes and the resulting tsunamis. indonesia is also rich in volcanoes, the most famous being the now disappeared krakatau (krakatoa).

