this is the history of africa, geographical classification.

well, an article called "history of africa" should be an article about the history of africa.  it shouldn't be a link page, i think; we certainly should have an article about the history of africa on this page.  it probably shouldn't be on an "outline of the history of africa" page, because one goes to a "history of africa" page precisely to get an outline of the history of africa.

to link to a topic that doesn't have an obvious focus within one of the regions below, create a link here at the top level and/or link it within multiple region pages.

in a certain way, there is really no such thing as a "top-level" page within wikipedia.  pages can and should be linked to from a wide variety of other relevant pages.

anyway, this sort of thing goes without saying on wikipedia.  we want to interlink pages as much as possible--more or less.

--larry sanger

an article about "history of africa" could be a) very big b) an outline c) a link page.

a) is not good i think, since you can't easy link into a big page.
you suggest b) which is ok.

but i think the regions should be left as a separate page and linked at the beginning of the
article.

-- hagedis

seeing as how the other continental history pages are all link pages, i think that the text should be shortened or lost.  also, looking at what's here -- it isn't by any means a history of aftrica -- it's a history of african regions known to or ruled by other (mostly western) powers.  i think it really needs to go, with the text incorporated into more appropriate areas.  this exactly why there is so much pressure to teach world history, and a great example of the reasons that many non-western peoples refuse to believe westerners can treat their history witht the proper respect.  i am generally very anti-political correctness for its own sake, but as an historian working in the 21st century, i feel very uncomfortable with the 'pedia putting out this article as is.  jhk

this article is eurocentric to the point of being racist. it’s shocking that any article on african history doesn’t detail black african states like ghana, mali, songhai, kanem-bornu, kano, ashanti, oyo, benin, ife, monomontapa, or the swahili-speaking city-states in east africa, just to name some of the most notable. 

although the posted content is well-written and fairly comprehensive, the lack of any attempt to address the historical record of literate black societies or reconstruct the histories of pre-literate but highly sophisticated peoples like the yoruba is far more disconcerting than the moronic antics of zog, who was wikipedia’s resident nazi for a brief period of time prior to his many bannings. at least that kind of racism is blocked with great effort from dozens of contributors, but these little subtle biases go unnoticed. 

i'm going to do my best to correct this. meanwhile, i'm begging other contributors to help. 

172