__toc__

history and geographical classification?

this is the history of africa, geographical classification.

well, an article called "history of africa" should be an article about the history of africa.  it shouldn't be a link page, i think; we certainly should have an article about the history of africa on this page.  it probably shouldn't be on an "outline of the history of africa" page, because one goes to a "history of africa" page precisely to get an outline of the history of africa.

to link to a topic that doesn't have an obvious focus within one of the regions below, create a link here at the top level and/or link it within multiple region pages.

in a certain way, there is really no such thing as a "top-level" page within wikipedia.  pages can and should be linked to from a wide variety of other relevant pages.

anyway, this sort of thing goes without saying on wikipedia.  we want to interlink pages as much as possible--more or less.

--larry sanger

an article about "history of africa" could be a) very big b) an outline c) a link page.

a) is not good i think, since you can't easy link into a big page.
you suggest b) which is ok.

but i think the regions should be left as a separate page and linked at the beginning of the
article.

-- hagedis

seeing as how the other continental history pages are all link pages, i think that the text should be shortened or lost.  also, looking at what's here -- it isn't by any means a history of aftrica -- it's a history of african regions known to or ruled by other (mostly western) powers.  i think it really needs to go, with the text incorporated into more appropriate areas.  this exactly why there is so much pressure to teach world history, and a great example of the reasons that many non-western peoples refuse to believe westerners can treat their history witht the proper respect.  i am generally very anti-political correctness for its own sake, but as an historian working in the 21st century, i feel very uncomfortable with the 'pedia putting out this article as is.  jhk

eurocentric? racist?
this article is eurocentric to the point of being racist. it’s shocking that any article on african history doesn’t detail black african states like ghana, mali, songhai, kanem-bornu, kano, ashanti, oyo, benin, ife, monomontapa, or the swahili-speaking city-states in east africa, just to name some of the most notable. 

although the posted content is well-written and fairly comprehensive, the lack of any attempt to address the historical record of literate black societies or reconstruct the histories of pre-literate but highly sophisticated peoples like the yoruba is far more disconcerting than the moronic antics of zog, who was wikipedia’s resident nazi for a brief period of time prior to his many bannings. at least that kind of racism is blocked with great effort from dozens of contributors, but these little subtle biases go unnoticed. 

i'm going to do my best to correct this. meanwhile, i'm begging other contributors to help. 

172

even what little is said of africans is not always correct. e.g. the distinction between xhosa en bantu.. isixhosa is a bantu language. where it says xhosa probably khoisan is to be substitutedsd.

just spotted that, fixing it now -- cabalamat 03:16, 12 sep 2003 (utc)

i have created wikipedia:africa-related regional notice board.—ifaqeer (talk to me!) 05:28, dec 7, 2004 (utc)

useful info

someone put this paragraph in history of europe:

also, in 1835, an uprising of german afrikaners attacked the dutch army regiment stationed at the town of neu scheveningen. this lead to all-out war on the african continent, lodged between the dutch, english, and french against the germans and italians. eventually, the peace was restored; the germans were given a geographically-separate colony in which to live, near present-day lesotho; it was named new saxony. the war was officially ended in 1837, with the treaty of tripoli. the germans eventually separated, politically, from their homeland, and set up a kingdom. but the new king was eaten by a lion, and the kingdom of new saxony was once again swallowed up by the dutch. no warfare, suprisingly, took place on european soil, and the treaty held for many years.

it obviously doesn't belong there but i thought that maybe this information could be useful here. kpalion 10:31, 20 mar 2004 (utc)

 unified history 

i think there does need to be an outline history of africa page, not just a series of links - even if some matter is duplicated. this is because africa is thought of far more as a single entity than most other continents. the division of africa into a large number of small countries also makes it difficult for people without much knowledge of africa to decide which modern nation's history to investigate in order to get the material they want.

the article certainly does need a far less euro-centric makeover however.

 evolution of language 
the khoisan languages are almost unique in using clicks, and all but one of the few other languages to use them are believed to have acquired them under khoisan influence.  khoisan languages are now spoken mostly by isolated islands of genetically and culturally distinct populations of hunter-gatherers on marginal lands such as the kalahari desert.

i moved the above paragraph, together with its heading, out of the article. the paragraph actually says nothing about the evolution of language and it does not in any way make clear why khoisan, or its rarity, would have anything to do with the 'out of africa'-hypothesis. - mark dingemanse (talk) 22:04, 27 oct 2004 (utc)

fair point.  i think it's quite probable that khoisan (if it's a valid family) was one of the earliest surviving branches off "proto-world", but it's scarcely more than speculation to say anything much about that at this stage. - mustafaa 22:24, 27 oct 2004 (utc)

 africa-related regional notice board 

i have created wikipedia:africa-related regional notice board.—ifaqeer (talk to me!) 05:29, dec 7, 2004 (utc)