hanover_in_germany.png
map of germany showing hanover 

alternate meanings: hanover (district), hanover (region), other uses

image:hannover_coa.jpg

hanover (in german: hannover), on the leine river, is the capital city of the state of lower saxony (niedersachsen) in germany. it is also the capital of the surrounding hanover district and region. population: 515,219 (2001).

history

the town was founded in medieval times on the bank of the leine river (the original name honovere may be translated to "high bank"). it was a small village of ferrymen and fishermen, which became a comparatively large town in the 13th century. in the 14th century a massive city wall with three town gates was built to secure the city, and the main churches of hanover were constructed.

in 1636 the duke of calenberg decided to move his residence to hanover. his duchy was afterwards known as the duchy of hanover (see: house of hanover). his descendants would later become kings of england; the first of them was george i, who ascended to the british throne in 1714. three kings of england were at the same time princes (electors) of hanover. george iii elevated the title to king of hanover. the town expanded to the opposite bank of the leine river and grew considerably.

 image:hannover_ernst-august-platz_hanover thumbnail.jpg ernst august platz in hanover  larger version  

during the seven years' war on july 26, 1757 the battle of hastenbeck took place. the french army defeated the hanoverian army of observation, leading to the occupation of hannover.

after napoleon imposed the convention of artlenburg (convention of the elbe) on july 5, 1803 about 30,000 french soldiers occupied hanover. the convention also meant the disbanding of the army of hanover. george iii did not recognize the convention of the elbe and made an effort to recruit foreign troops. as a result a great number of soldiers of hanover eventually emigrated to england leading to the king's german legion which later played an important role in the battle of waterloo. 

in 1837, the personal union of great britain and hanover was ended, as william iv's heir in great britain was female, and hanover could be inherited only by males. hanover continued as a kingdom until 1866, when it was annexed by prussia. after the annexation, people of hanover were opposing prussian regime.
nevertheless, the growth of hanover city continued until world war ii, when two thirds of the town was bombed to ashes. after the war, hanover became famous for hosting commercial expositions such as the deutsche messe.  there the annual cebit is held, the world's greatest computer expo. in 2000, hanover hosted the expo 2000.

sights

 marktkirche (church, 14th century)
 altes rathaus (old town hall, 15th century)
 leineschloss (the former castle of the kings, today the seat of lower saxony's government)
 herrenhäuser gärten (botanical gardens) - also the annual international fireworks contest held in these gardens
 gehry tower

miscellaneous

note: hanover is the correct english spelling, even though the german spelling is with double n. it should always be used for the british house of hanover, even if you choose to write the city the german way.

there are several universities in hanover:
 hanover conservatory
 hanover medical school
 school of veterinary medicine hanover
 university of hanover

there is one university of applied science and arts in hanover:

 fachhochschule hannover

famous quarters of hanover:

hannover-nordstadt
herrenhausen
hannover-zoo

the rock bands scorpions and fury in the slaughterhouse are originally from hanover.

external link

 city's own website
 city panoramas - panoramic views of hannover's highlights
fembio special: notable women of hanover

de:hannover
eo:hanovro
fr:hanovre
nl:hannover
ja:ハノーファー
nds:hannover
sv:hannover