homeostasis is the property of an open system, especially living organisms, to regulate its internal environment to maintain a stable, constant condition, by means of multiple dynamic equilibrium adjustments, controlled by interrelated regulation mechanisms. the term was coined in 1932 by walter bradford cannon from the greek homoios (same, like, resembling) and stasis (to stand, posture).
biological homeostasis
homeostasis is one of the fundamental characteristics of living things.  it is the maintenance of the internal environment within tolerable limits.

with regard to any parameter, an organism may be a conformer or a regulator.  regulators try to maintain the parameter at a constant level, regardless of what is happening in its environment. conformers allow the environment to determine the parameter.  for instance, endothermic animals maintain a constant body temperature, while ectothermic animals exhibit wide variation in body temperature.

this is not to say that conformers may not have behavioral adaptations that allow them to exert some control over the parameter in question.  for instance, reptiles often sit on sun-heated rocks in the morning to raise their body temperatures.

an advantage of homeostatic regulation is that it allows the organism to function more effectively. for instance, ectotherms tend to become sluggish at low temperatures, whereas endotherms are as active as always. on the other hand, regulation requires energy.  one reason snakes are able to eat just once a week is that they use much less energy for maintaining homeostasis.

 varieties of homeostasis 
the dynamic energy budget theory for metabolic organisation delineates structure and (one or more) reserves in an organism. its formulation is based on three different types of homeostasis:
strong homeostasis is that structure and reserve do not change in composition. since the amount of reserve and structure can vary, this allows a particular change in the composition of the whole body as explained by the dynamic energy budget theory.
weak homeostasis is that the ratio of the amounts of reserve and structure becomes constant as long food availability  is constant, even when the organism grows. this means that the whole body composition is constant during growth in constant environments.
structural homeostasis means that the sub-individual structures grow in harmony with the whole individual;
the relative proportions of the individuals remain constant.

ecological homeostasis
ecological homeostasis is found in a climax community of maximum permitted biodiversity, given the prevailing ecological conditions.

in disturbed ecosystems or sub-climax biological communities such as the island of krakatoa, after its major eruption in 1883, the established stable homeostasis of the previous forest climax ecosystem was destroyed and all life eliminated from the island. in the years after the eruption, krakatoa went through a sequence of ecological changes in which successive groups of new plant or animal species followed one another, leading to increasing biodiversity and eventually culminating in a re-established climax community.  this ecological succession on krakatoa occurred in a number of several stages, in which a sere is defined as "a stage in a sequence of events by which succession occurs". the complete chain of seres leading to a climax is called a prisere.  in the case of krakatoa, the island as reached its climax community with eight hundred different species being recorded in 1983, one hundred years after the eruption which cleared all life off the island. evidence confirms that this number has been homeostatic for some time, with the introduction of new species rapidly leading to elimination of old ones.

the evidence of krakatoa, and other disturbed or virgin ecosystems shows that the initial colonisation by pioneer or r strategy species occurs through positive feedback reproduction strategies, where species are weeds, producing huge numbers of possible offspring, but investing little in the success of any one.  rapid boom and bust plague or pest cycles are observed with such species.  as an ecosystem starts to approach climax these species get replaced by more sophisticated climax species which through negative feedback, adapt themselves to specific environmental conditions.  these species, closely controlled by carrying capacity, follow k strategies where species produce fewer numbers of potential offspring, but invest more heavily in securing the reproductive success of each one to the micro-environmental conditions of its specific ecological niche.

it begins with a pioneer community and ends with a climax community. this climax community occurs when the ultimate vegetation has become in equilibrium with the local environment. 
 
such ecosystems form nested communities or heterarchies, in which homeostasis at one level, contributes to homeostatic processes at another holonic level.  for example, the loss of leaves on a mature rainforest tree gives a space for new growth, and contributes to the plant litter and soil humus build-up upon which such growth depends.  equally a mature rainforest tree reduces the sunlight falling on the forest floor and helps prevent invasion by other species.  but trees too fall to the forest floor and a healthy forest glade is dependent upon a constant rate of forest regrowth, produced by the fall of logs, and the recycling of forest nutrients through the respiration of termites and other insect, fungal and bacterial decomposers.  similarly such forest glades contribute ecological services, such as the regulation of microclimates or of the hydrological cycle for an ecosystem, and a number of different ecosystems act together to maintain homeostasis perhaps of a number of river catchments within a bioregion.  a diversity of bioregions similarly makes up a stable homeostatic biological region or biome.

in the gaia hypothesis, james lovelock stated that the entire mass of living matter on earth (or any planet with life) functions as a vast homeostatic superorganism that actively modifies its planetary environment to produce the environmental conditions necessary for its own survival. in this view, the entire planet maintains homeostasis. whether this sort of system is present on earth is still open to debate. however, some relatively simple homeostatic mechanisms are generally accepted. for example, when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels rise, certain plants are able to grow better and thus act to remove more carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. when sunlight is plentiful and atmospheric temperature climbs, the phytoplankton of the ocean surface waters thrive and produce more dimethyl sulfide, dms. the dms molecules act as cloud condensation nuclei which produce more clouds and thus increase the atmospheric albedo and this feeds back to lower the temperature of the atmosphere.  as scientists discover more about gaia, vast numbers of positive and negative feedback loops are being discovered, that together maintain a metastable condition, sometimes within very broad range of environmental conditions.

reactive homeostasis

example of use: "reactive homeostasis is an immediate response to a homeostatic challenge such as predation."

however, any homeostasis is impossible without reaction - because homeostasis is and must be a "feedback" phenomenon.

the phrase "reactive homeostasis" is simply short for: "reactive compensation reestablishing homeostasis", that is to say, "reestablishing a point of homeostasis." - it should not be confused with a separate kind of homeostasis or a distinct phenomenon from homeostasis, it is simply the compensation (or compensatory) phase of homeostasis. 

synonymous with "compensatory reaction" where a homeostatic dynamic is being referred to.

other fields
the term has come to be used in other fields, as well.

an actuary may refer to risk homeostasis, where (for example) people who have anti-lock brakes have no better safety record than those without anti-lock brakes, because they unconsciously compensate for the safer vehicle via less-safe driving habits. previously, certain maneuvers involved minor skids, evoking fear and avoidance: now the anti-lock system moves the boundary for such feedback, and behavior patterns expand into the no-longer punitive area. it has also been suggested that ecological crises are an instance of risk homeostasis in which behavior known to be dangerous continues until dramatic consequences actually occur.

sociologists and psychologists may refer to stress homeostasis, the tendency of a population or an individual to stay at a certain level of stress, often generating artificial stresses if the "natural" level of stress is not enough. 

jean francois lyotard, a postmodern theorist, has applied this term to societal 'power centers' that he describes as being 'governed by a principle of homeostasis.' for example the scientific hierarchy, which will sometimes ignore a radical new discovery for years because it destabilizes previously accepted norms. (see "the postmodern condition: a report on knowledge" by j.f. lyotard)

andrew potter has used the term waste homeostasis in reference to the lack of net gain from energy saving technologies.

a 2007 study purported to find (and show clinically) conversational homeostasis in which overly-familiar people (such as spouses) condense their speech so much that they are actually worse at communicating novel information than strangers are; while not being conscious of this problem. 

some herbal medicines, known as adaptogens, have been defined to function as non-toxic metabolic regulators that can enhance metabolic homeostasis during stress.winston, david & maimes, steven. “adaptogens: herbs for strength, stamina, and stress relief,” healing arts press, 2007.

examples
thermoregulation
the skeletal muscles can shiver to produce heat if the body temperature is too low.
non-shivering thermogenesis involves the decomposition of fat to produce heat.
sweating cools the body with the use of evaporation.
chemical regulation
the pancreas produces insulin and glucagon to control blood-sugar concentration.
the lungs take in oxygen and give off carbon dioxide.
the kidneys remove urea, and adjust the concentrations of water and a wide variety of ions.

most of these organs are controlled by hormones secreted from the pituitary gland, which in turn is directed by the hypothalamus.

