eo:hertfordshire

hertfordshireimage:englandhertfordshire.pnggeographyregion:east of englandarea:1,643 km²admin hq:hertfordiso 3166:gb-hrtons code:26borders on:greater london, 
buckinghamshire, 
bedfordshire (cerem.), 
cambridgeshire,
essexdemographicspopulation:(2002 est.)1,036,144density:631 / km²ethnicity:93.7% white3.7% s. asian1.0% afro-caribpolitics200px|arms of hertfordshire county council
hertfordshire county councilhttp://www.hertsdirect.org/admin:conservativemps:barbara follett
claire ward
james clappison
kerry pollard
marion roe
mark prisk
melanie johnson
oliver heald
peter lilley
richard page
tony mcwalterdistrictsimage:hertfordshirenumbered.png
three rivers
watford
hertsmere
welwyn hatfield
broxbourne
east hertfordshire
stevenage
north hertfordshire
st albans
dacorum

hertfordshire (pronounced 'hartfordshire' and abbreviated as 'herts') is an inland county, officially part of the east of england government region.

it is located to the north of greater london, bordering the london boroughs (from west to east) of hillingdon, harrow, barnet and enfield.  to the east of hertfordshire is essex, to the west is buckinghamshire and to the north are bedfordshire, luton and cambridgeshire.  much of the county is part of the london commuter belt. hertfordshire lost barnet to greater london in 1965, but gained potters bar and south mimms from middlesex.

hertfordshire was originally the area assigned to a fortress constructed at hertford under the rule of edward the elder in 913.  the name hertfordshire appears in the anglo-saxon chronicle in 1011.

hertfordshire is the starting point of the new river a man made waterway, opened in 1613 to supply london with fresh drinking water.

 towns, cities and villages 
albury
aldbury
apsley
ashwell
berkhamstead
bishop's stortford
bovingdon
broxbourne
bushey
cheshunt
hatfield
hemel hempstead
hertford
hertford heath
 hitchin
hoddesdon
holwell
langley
letchworth garden city
long marston
mill end
new mill
oxhey
potters bar
royston
stevenage
st albans
tring
watford
welwyn garden city

 places of interest 
the university of hertfordshire was created from the hatfield polytechnic which originated in hatfield.
the six hills roman site in stevenage.
hatfield house : jacobean house, gardens and park
st albans cathedral

 external link 
university of hertfordshire