hold-and-modify (more commonly know as ham) is a screenmode of the amiga micro computer. it works by interpreting the data for a pixel as 'copy the colour of my neighbour to the left' (hold), then 'change that colour' (modify). this allowed the computer to use a fairly rich palette, even if there were only a few bits available to indicate the colour.

a disadvantage was that rapid colour changes within a row of pixels were not possible, so if you tried to encode such a fast change, you would get artifacting similar to the type you sometimes get with the jpeg graphics format.

in the early days of multimedia, ham gave the amiga a small advantage over competing systems, because it allowed the system to display digitized photographs and rendered 3d images at a much more realistic level.

on early amiga systems, only 5 bits could be used to indicate colours. most screenmodes worked with indexed colours, meaning the 2^5 (=32) colours could be displayed at most. the ham mode reserved 1 bit to indicate whether a colour was indexed or not (so 16 colours could come from an index and form the initial colours) and used 4 bits to indicate the shift in colour one pixel would have from its left neighbour. 

a row of pixels would always start with one of the 16 indexed colours.

but how does it calculate the colour shift from there on?

ham allowed for a maximum of 4096 colours to be used, because the system used 12-bit colour, 4 bits for each of red, green and blue (2^12 = 4096). 

on later amiga systems (starting with the a1200 and a4000), a pixel could have 8 bits to encode its colour, which allowed for 256 colours from an index, and a ham mode allowing colours from a 24-bit palette. ham-8 as it was called, therefore allowed a maximum of 262,144 colours on-screen from a palette of 16,777,216.

ham was only originally put into the amigas custom chipset as an experiment. to quote jay miner (known as "the father of the amiga") himself:

"hold and modify came from a trip to see flight simulators in action and i had a kind of idea about a primitive type of virtual reality.  ntsc on the chip meant you could hold the hue and change the luminance by only altering four bits.  when we changed to rgb i said that wasn't needed any more as it wasn't useful and i asked the chip layout guy to take it off.  he came back and said that this would either leave a big hole in the middle of the chip or take a three-month redesign and we couldn't do that.  i didn't think anyone would use it.  i was wrong again as that has really given the amiga its edge in terms of the colour palette."