the hamiltonian, denoted h, has two distinct but closely related meanings. in classical mechanics, it is a quantity derived from the lagrangian, which underlies the re-formulation of classical mechanics known as hamiltonian mechanics. in quantum mechanics, it is the observable corresponding to the total energy of a system.

 the hamiltonian operator in quantum mechanics 

as explained in the article mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, the quantum hamiltonian h is a hermitian operator acting on the hilbert space of a system. the set of eigenkets (eigenvectors) of h, denoted {|a〉}, provide an orthonormal basis for the hilbert space. the spectrum of allowed energy levels of the system is given by the set of eigenvalues, denoted {ea}:

.

since h is a hermitian operator, the energy is always a real number.

depending on the hilbert space of the system, the energy spectrum may be either discrete or continuous. in fact, certain systems have a continuous energy spectrum in one range of energies and a discrete spectrum in another range. an example of such a system is the finite potential well, which admits bound states with discrete negative energies and free states with continuous positive energies.

the hamiltonian generates the time evolution of quantum states. if |ψ(t)〉 is the state of the system at time t, then

.

where ℏ is dirac's constant. this equation is known as the schrödinger equation. (it takes the same form as the hamilton-jacobi equation, which is one of the reasons h is also called the hamiltonian.) given the state at some initial time (t = 0), we can integrate it to obtain the state at any subsequent time. in particular, if h is independent of time, then

.

where the exponential operator on the right hand side is defined by the usual series. this can be shown to be a unitary operator, and is a common form of the time evolution operator.

 energy eigenket degeneracy, symmetry, and conservation laws 

in many systems, two or more energy eigenkets have the same eigenvalue. this is known as degeneracy. degeneracy occurs whenever a nontrivial unitary operator u commutes with the hamiltonian. to see this, suppose that |a〉 is an energy eigenket. then u|a〉 is an energy eigenket with the same eigenvalue, since

since u is nontrivial, at least one pair of |a〉 and u|a〉 must represent distinct states. therefore, h has at least one pair of degenerate energy eigenkets.

the existence of a symmetry operator implies the existence of a conserved observable. let g be the hermitian generator of u:

it is straightforward to show that if u commutes with h, then so does g:

therefore,

in the second line, we have used the schrödinger equation, as well as its dual,

.

(note that h is hermitian.) thus, the expected value of the observable g is conserved for any state of the system.