i just wanted to say that bands like madball, sick of it all or 25 ta life could be added to the hardcore-metal bands list but... sepultura is not hardcore! it's not even close to the type of sound here described (which i think is a good hardcore-sound description). sepultura is a death metal band! perhaps with some diferent beliefs, but they're not an hardcore band! they are agnostic front and sick of it all friends, but i repeat... they're not an hardcore band!
and metallica are neither!
ok, ok!  all right, already!  i just put metallica in there becuase of their affinity with hardcore (discharge/ misfits earth a.d.), but you're right, they belong elsewhere.  i don't know who put sepultura in there, though.

i think the concept of 'hardcore heavy metal' is really dubious: metalcore is a crossover between hardcore punk and metal, which means that the "harcore" in "metalcore" is the hardcore already referred to in "hardcore punk".--xmarkx 06:00, 15 jun 2004 (utc)

____ 
i took out the reference to "local mores" from the definition of hardcore porn.  since such attitudes very so widely, it made the definition meaningless.
and i took out the sentences about "a lot of bands" being "cynical" b/c of npov concerns.  and i removed the sentence linking hardcore to the stooges and the mc5.  that's kind of a tenuous connection, only in that the bands that inspired hardcore were more directly influenced by those [great] acid/hard rock bands.  anyone interested will most likely go to the punk page and see the early punk bands or pre-punk bands links.  cheers! :)

i think this should be a disambiguation page, and may get around to making it one sometime soon.  there are three distinct genres of music called "hardcore", and the punk rock kind doesn't have ownership over the word. tuf-kat

i just thought the word needed a general definition, so i tried my hand at giving it some sort of meaning.  if i'm off base, have at it. nithos 20:21, 3 sep 2004 (utc)

 separate article about the term "hardcore" 

i think there should be a proper article for "hardcore" concerning its etymology and such. i for one have no idea where the term has originated, but apparently it's used in a whole lot of contexts from politics to music to adult entertainment. - quirk 14:26, 15 november 2006 (utc)