 hardcore cadre 

a disambiguation page is not an article, nor is it a dictionary page. it is a page for disambiguating wikipedia articles. if there's no article for the term, and no article to link to that discusses the term, then it doesn't belong on the dab page. if you think the subject deserves its own article, then start it on its own page. but in this case, it still wouldn't belong on this dab page, because it is not something known as (or that might be known as) simply hardcore. --shelfskewed talk 17:07, 8 february 2008 (utc)

the section was modified to be a general application of the term wikt:hardcore, but in any event, it's a dictionary definition, which is what we do not include per wp:dab (here). --cheeser1 (talk) 17:13, 8 february 2008 (utc)

should we add a brief dict def intro line? some thing like "hardcore refers to anything intense or explicit. the term is also used to describe a person or group strongly committed to an ideology, cause, or activity." --shelfskewed talk 17:39, 8 february 2008 (utc)

that does not appear to be the accepted practice. refer to this and other relevant parts of the mos. --cheeser1 (talk) 17:41, 8 february 2008 (utc)
 the fact that the eu uses the term to refer to a core group of countries is not a dictionary definition and is encyclopedic and sourced. there are countless precedents of including such information. --neonwhite  user page talk 17:50, 8 february 2008 (utc)
i repeat: dab pages are are not articles. citations and external links in general are not used on dab pages. and further, the european union article nowhere mentions the term hardcore, so linking to is not helpful. you say there are precedents for this kind of entry--well, yes, there are many incorrect disambiguation pages out there, and i'm sure you could find a precedent for anything. but it's still wrong.--shelfskewed talk 17:58, 8 february 2008 (utc)
and nw, please watch the 3rr. --cheeser1 (talk) 18:01, 8 february 2008 (utc)
 you are incorrect, all main pages on wikipedia are articles and 