the term "hate site" is used by some to refer to websites that are said to promote hatred.

in many cases, hate sites contain criticism of a specific race, religion, sexual behavior, or nationality.

issues regarding hate sites have been a major concern for people of all political points of view.  many are concerned about the effect that the content of these sites may have on society.  at the center of the debate, however, is the danger to human freedom and liberty and the oppressive nature implicit in various proposals to deal with hatred.  three main approaches have been proposed for this problem: education, content filtering software, and banning hate sites. 

because the definition of what constitutes hatred varies from person to person, and claims of hate mongering are seen by some as merely being political tactics employed by activist groups to smear or attack their political opponents, there are obvious dangers involved in any attempt to reduce or eliminate hate sites through the law.  the danger revolves not only around the differences of opinion over what constitutes hate, but around the supposed right of individuals to express their own thoughts or feelings, even if they are not popular, or if they include criticisms that some believe express and promote hatred.

in practice, a ban on hate sites could cause a situation in which a political entity successfully defines its opponents' point of view or accusations as hatred, and gain oppressive and undemocratic powers to suppress and even criminalize free speech and real debate over an issue.  free-speech advocates and others concerned with personal liberty and human rights are wary of attempts to ban expression of certain opinions because of the danger that it may be a roundabout attempt at suppressing legitimate concerns.  if a ban were imposed, it's argued, then once any position – even if true or legitimate – is defined as hatred, oppression of those who hold and openly express it will ensue.

in the light of the many drawbacks to proposed political solutions to the problem of hate sites on the internet, many content-filtering programs have appeared with the capability of blocking sites containing certain words or themes.  these can be used to help parents protect their children from hatred-promoting websites, as well as from pornography and many other types of website.  unlike proposed government solutions to the problem, private citizens using software by choice on their own computers do not pose a threat of supression of freedom of speech, because only the reception of the speech is blocked, not the speech itself.

