heavy water is deuterium oxide, or d2o or 2h2o. it is chemically the same as normal water, h2o, but the hydrogen atoms are of the heavy isotope deuterium, in which the nucleus contains a neutron in addition to the proton found in the nucleus of any hydrogen atom. gilbert newton lewis isolated the first sample of pure heavy water in 1933. 

semiheavy water, hdo, also exists whenever there is water with hydrogen-1 (or protium) and deuterium present in the mixture. this is because hydrogen atoms (hydrogen-1 and deuterium) are rapidly exchanged between water molecules. water containing 50 percent h and 50 percent d actually contains about 50 percent hdo and 25 percent each of h2o and d2o, in dynamic equilibrium. 

uses
nuclear magnetic resonance
deuterium oxide is used in nuclear magnetic resonance (nmr) spectroscopy when the solvent of interest is water and the nuclide of interest is hydrogen. this is because the signal from the water solvent would interfere with the signal from the molecule of interest.  deuterium has a different magnetic moment from hydrogen and therefore does not contribute to the nmr signal at the hydrogen resonance frequency.

neutron moderator
heavy water is used in certain types of nuclear reactors where it acts as a neutron moderator to slow down neutrons so that they can react with the uranium in the reactor.  
the candu reactor uses this design. light water also acts as a moderator but because light water absorbs neutrons, reactors using light water must use enriched uranium rather than natural uranium, otherwise criticality is impossible.  

because heavy water reactors can use natural uranium, it is of concern in efforts to prevent nuclear proliferation.  heavy water production reactors can be designed to turn uranium into bomb-usable plutonium without requiring enrichment facilities. heavy water production reactors have been used for this purpose by india, israel, pakistan, north korea, russia and usa.  there is no evidence that heavy water power reactors, such as the candu design, have been used for military plutonium production.

due to its potential for use in nuclear weapons programs, heavy water is subject to government control in several countries. suppliers of heavy water and heavy water production technology typically apply iaea administered safeguards and material accounting to heavy water.  (in australia, the nuclear non-proliferation (safeguards) act 1987).

neutrino detector
the sudbury neutrino observatory (sno) in sudbury, ontario uses 1000 tonnes of heavy water on loan from atomic energy of canada limited. the neutrino detector is 6800 feet underground in an old mine to shield it from cosmic rays. sno detects the cherenkov radiation as neutrinos pass through the heavy water.

toxicity
to perform their tasks, enzymes rely on their finely tuned networks of hydrogen bonds, both in the active center with their substrates, and outside the active centre, to stabilize their tertiary structures. as a hydrogen bond with deuterium is slightly stronger than one involving ordinary hydrogen, in a highly deuterated environment, the  normal reactions in the cell are disrupted. experiments in mice, rats, and dogs  have shown that a degree of 25 % deuteration causes sterility. high concentrations (90 %) rapidly kills fish, tadpoles, flatworms, and drosophila.

nonetheless, accidental or intentional poisoning is unlikely, as large amounts of heavy water would have to be ingested to produce any noticeable effects.

production
on earth, semiheavy water, hdo, occurs naturally in regular water at a proportion of 1 part per 3200. it may be separated from regular water by distillation or electrolysis and also by various chemical exchange processes, all of which exploit a kinetic isotope effect. in short, the difference in mass between the two hydrogen isotopes translates into a difference in the zero-point energy and thus into a slight difference in the speed at which the reaction proceeds. once hdo becomes a significant fraction of the water, heavy water will become more prevalent as well as water molecules trade hydrogen atoms very frequently. to produce pure heavy water by distillation or electrolysis requires a large cascade of stills or electrolysis chambers, and consumes large amounts of power, so the chemical methods are generally preferred. the most important chemical method is the girdler sulfide process.

united states
in 1953, the united states began using heavy water in plutonium production reactors at the savannah river site.  the first of the five heavy water reactors came online in 1953, and the last was placed in cold shutdown in 1996.  the srs reactors were heavy water reactors so that they could produce both plutonium, and tritium for the us nuclear weapons program.

the us developed the girdler sulfide chemical exchange production process which was first demonstrated on a large scale at the dana, indiana plant in 1945 and at the savannah river plant, georgia in 1949.  the srp was operated by dupont for the usdoe until about 1980.

norway
in 1934, norsk hydro built the first commercial heavy water plant with a capacity of 12 tonnes per year at vemork. during world war ii, the allies decided to destroy the plant and its heavy water in order to inhibit the nazi development of nuclear weapons. in late 1942, a raid by british paratroopers failed when the gliders crashed. all the raiders were killed in the crash or shot by german army troops. in february 1943, a group of 12 norwegian infiltrators, trained in britain by the special operations executive and dropped by parachute into norway, managed to disrupt production for two months by dynamiting the facilities. on november 16, 1943, the allied air forces dropped over 400 bombs on the site.

the allied air raid prompted the nazi german government to move all available heavy water to germany for safekeeping. however, on february 20 1944, a norwegian partisan was able to sink the ferry carrying the heavy water across lake tinnsjø at the cost of 14 norwegian civilians.

the story was used for a 1965 hollywood movie, the heroes of telemark, starring kirk douglas. also, one of the missions in the playstation video game medal of honor was loosely based on the occurences at the heavy water plant, including the demolition of containment facilities and the destruction of the german ferry.

