the hopwood program administers the university of michigan hopwood award in literature, as well as several other awards in writing. it is located in the hopwood room at the university of michigan and serves the needs and interests of hopwood contestants. the room was established by professor roy w. cowden, director of the hopwood awards from 1933 to 1952, who generously contributed a part of his library, which has grown through the addition of many volumes of contemporary literature. in addition to housing the winning manuscripts from the past years of the contests, the hopwood room has a lending library of twentieth -century literature, a 
generous supply of non-circulating current periodicals, some reference 
books on how to get published, information on graduate and summer writing 
programs, and a collection of screen plays donated by former hopwood winner 
lawrence kasdan.

prizes administered by the hopwood program
the hopwood program also administers the following writing contests: the kasdan scholarship in creative writing, the arthur miller award of the u-m club of new york scholarship, the jeffery l. weisberg poetry prize, the dennis mcintyre poetry prize, the chamberlain award for creative writing, the helen s. and john wagner prize, the andrea beauchamp prize, the robert f. haugh prize, the meader family award, the naomi saferstein literary award, the leonard and eileen newman writing prizes and the paul and sonia handleman poetry award. 

notable hopwood winners
steve hamilton, 1983, author of “blood is the sky”, “north of nowhere”, “a cold day in paradise”, “winter of the wolf moon”, “the hunting wind”, “north of nowhere”, and “ice run”.
lawrence kasdan
elizabeth kostova, novel-in-progress ("the historian")
arthur miller
patrick o'keeffe  , mfa, winner of the chamberlain award for creative writing for "above the bar." (administered by the hopwood program) and instructor in the university of michigan’s sweetland writing center has won the 2006 story prize, the richest u.s. prize for short fiction, for the hill road, a collection of four novellas set in a fictional irish farming village. o'keeffe's writing has been compared to the irish short-story and novel writer william trevor.
marge piercy, poetry and fiction (1957)

