the hopwood program administers the university of michigan hopwood award in literature, as well as several other awards in writing. it is located in the hopwood room at the university of michigan and serves the needs and interests of hopwood contestants. the room was established by professor roy w. cowden, director of the hopwood awards from 1933 to 1952, who generously contributed a part of his library, which has grown through the addition of many volumes of contemporary literature. in addition to housing the winning manuscripts from the past years of the contests, the hopwood room has a lending library of twentieth -century literature, a 
generous supply of non-circulating current periodicals, some reference 
books on how to get published, information on graduate and summer writing 
programs, and a collection of screen plays donated by former hopwood winner 
lawrence kasdan.

prizes administered by the hopwood program
the hopwood program also administers the following writing contests: 
 the kasdan scholarship in creative writing
 arthur miller award of the u-m club of new york scholarship
 the jeffery l. weisberg poetry prize
 the chamberlain award for creative writing
 the dennis mcintyre poetry prize
 the andrea beauchamp prize the helen s. and john wagner prize
 the robert f. haugh prize
 the meader family award
 the naomi saferstein literary award
 the leonard and eileen newman writing prizes
 the paul and sonia handleman poetry award

notable hopwood winners
max apple, (ba 1963). author of: the oranging of america (1976, short stories),zip: a novel of the left and the right (1978, novel),three stories (1983, short stories), free agents (1984, novel),the propheteers: a novel (1987, novel),roommates: my grandfather's story (1994, biography, of apple's grandfather)
brett ellen block, (bfa) award winning short story author and novelist.
john ciardi, (ma 1939) author of: a browser's dictionary, a second browser's dictionary, a third browser's dictionary, the collected poems of john ciardi, good words to you: an all-new dictionary and native's guide to the unknown,american language, how does a poem mean?, his translation of the inferno, limericks (with isaac asimov),you read to me, i'll read to you, (illustrated by edward gorey)
christopher paul curtis (ba 1999) newbery and coretta scott king award winning author of: the watsons go to birmingham-1963 (1996, novel), bud, not buddy (1999, novel), elijah of buxton (2006, novel)
mary gaitskill, (ba) bad behavior (1988),two girls, fat and thin (1991),because they wanted to (1997) (stories),veronica (2005).
steve hamilton, (ba 1983), author of "blood is the sky", "north of nowhere", "a cold day in paradise", "winter of the wolf moon", "the hunting wind", "north of nowhere", and "ice run". "a cold day in paradise," won the 1999 edgar allan poe award, one of the mystery genre's most prestigious awards.
robert hayden, (m.a. 1944). he enrolled in a graduate english literature program at the university of michigan where he studied with w. h. auden. in 1969 he joined the english department of the university of michigan, where he taught until his death in 1980.
lawrence kasdan (ma)
laura kasischke (m.f.a. 1987) winner of a pushcart prize and the elmer holmes bobst award for emerging writers
jane kenyon, (ba 1970, ma 1972). new hampshire's poet laureate
elizabeth kostova, (mfa) novel-in-progress the historian
arthur miller (ba 1938)
howard moss, won the pulitzer prize for poetry for selected poems in 1971.
davi napoleon, (ba 1966, ma 1968; known then as davi skurnick), theater historian and critic, author of chelsea on the edge: the adventures of an american theater.
frank o'hara, m.a. 1951. author of: "a city winter and other poems","oranges: 12 pastorals", "second avenue", "odes", "lunch poems. love poems".
patrick o'keeffe, (mfa), winner of the chamberlain award for creative writing for "above the bar." (administered by the hopwood program) and instructor in the university of michigan's sweetland writing center has won the 2005 story prize, the richest u.s. prize for short fiction, for "the hill road", a collection of four novellas set in a fictional irish farming village. o'keeffe's writing has been compared to the irish short-story and novel writer william trevor.
marge piercy, (ba) poetry and fiction (1957); author of seventeen volumes of poems
ronald wallace
nancy willard (b.a. 1958; ph.d.)

