hawick (; ) is a town in the scottish borders in the south east of scotland.  it is best-known for its annual common riding.

it is one of the farthest towns from the sea in scotland, in the heart of teviotdale and the largest town in the former county of roxburghshire.  it is also known for quality knitwear production.

hawick has distinctive sandstone buildings with slate roofs. these can be seen close to the a7.

hawick's french twin town is bailleul, in the nord département.

 sports 

the town is the home of hawick rugby football club and a senior football team, hawick royal albert, who currently play in the east of scotland football league.

rivalry between the small border towns is generally played out on the rugby union field and the historical antagonism continues to this day, hawick's main rival being the similarly-sized town of galashiels.

 local traditions 

the town host the annual common riding, which combines the annual riding of the boundaries of the town's common land with the commemoration of a victory of local youths over an english raiding party in 1514. in march 2007 this was described by the rough guide tourism guide as one of the best parties in the world. bbc news

people from hawick call themselves "teries", after a traditional song which includes the line "teribus ye teri odin".

 ba game 

the long forgotten hawick baw game was once played here by the 'uppies' and the 'doonies' on the first monday after the new moon in the month of february. the river of the town formed an important part of the pitch.  although the ba game is no longer played at hawick, it is still played at nearby jedburgh.
left|thumb|view along hawick high street.

 communications 

hawick lies in the valley of the teviot at the point where the river slitrig joins it. the a7 edinburgh to carlisle road passes through the town, with main roads also leading to berwick upon tweed (the a698) and newcastle-upon-tyne (the a6088, which joins the a68 at the carter bar,  south-east of hawick).

despite a great deal of local opposition the town lost its rail service in 1969, as part of the controversial beeching axe and is now said to be the farthest large town from a railway station in the united kingdom.  however there is a regular bus service to the railway station at carlisle, 42 miles (68 km) away. there are plans to reinstate the line.

the nearest airports are at edinburgh and newcastle.

 teri talk 
many hawick residents speak the local dialect of border scots which is informally known as "teri talk". it is similar (but not identical by any means) to the dialects spoken in surrounding towns, especially jedburgh, langholm and selkirk. the speech of this general area was described in
"dialect of the southern counties of scotland" (1873) by james murray, this being considered the first systematic study of any dialect. the hawick tongue retains many elements of old english, together with particular vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation, these peculiarities arising from the relative isolation of the town.

 