da:hortensia von and

hortense mcduck is a fictional character from the scrooge mcduck universe.

in the early 1950s carl barks was in his second decade of creating comic book stories starring donald duck and his various relatives. he had personally created several of the latter. scrooge mcduck and gladstone gander being the most notable among them. but the exact relation between them was still somewhat uncertain. carl decided to create a personal version of their family tree. to better define their relations he added several previously unknown relatives. among them was hortense mcduck.

hortense was introduced as a relatively well-connected member of her family. a daughter-in-law to grandma duck, a sister to matilda mcduck and scrooge mcduck, wife to quackmore duck, sister-in-law of goosetave gander and daphne duck, aunt to gladstone gander, mother to  thelma duck and donald duck and finally grandmother to huey, dewey and louie duck. it should perhaps be noted that carl had forgotten that al taliaferro had already given the name of donald's sister as  della duck. to avoid confusion her full name was later given as della thelma duck. carl never intended to publish this family tree as he had created it for personal use.

in 1981 carl was well into his retirement but his stories remained popular and had gained him unexpected fame. he had given several interviews and answered questions about his personal views on the characters and their stories. among other subjects, carl described his early version of the family tree. rough sketches of the tree were published in a number of fanzines. fans of the characters were pleased for the background it added to them. at this point mark worden decided to create a drawing of this family tree including portraits of the characters mentioned. among them was a portrait of hortense. otherwise mark made few changes to the tree, most notably adding daisy duck as donald's main love interest. his illustrated version of the tree was published at first in several fanzines and later in the carl barks library. the later was a ten-volume collection of his works in hardcover black-and-white edition. many readers were first introduced to hortense through this edition.

in 1987 don rosa, a long-time fan of carl barks and personal friend of mark worden, started creating his own stories featuring scrooge mcduck and his various associates. his stories contained numerous 