invictus is a short poem by the british poet william ernest henley that is the source of a number of familiar clichés and quotations. the title is latin for "unconquered". it was first published in 1875.

text of the poem
 out of the night that covers me,        black as the pit from pole to pole,  i thank whatever gods may be        for my unconquerable soul. 

 in the fell clutch of circumstance        i have not winced nor cried aloud.  under the bludgeonings of chance         my head is bloody, but unbowed. 

 beyond this place of wrath and tears        looms but the horror of the shade,  and yet the menace of the years        finds, and shall find me, unafraid. 

 it matters not how strait the gate,        how charged with punishments the scroll,  i am the master of my fate:        i am the captain of my soul.

 background 
at the age of 12 henley became a victim of tuberculosis of the bone. in spite of it all, in 1867 he successfully passed the oxford local examination as a senior student. unfortunately, his diseased foot, treated by crude methods, had to be amputated directly below the knee; worse yet, physicians announced the only way to save his life was to amputate the other also. henley persevered and survived with one foot intact. he was discharged in 1875, and was able to lead an active life for nearly 30 years despite his disability. with an artificial foot, he lived until the age of 54. "invictus" was written from a hospital bed.

 the poem in popular culture  

through this poem, henley gave the world the familiar phrase "my head is bloody, but unbowed".  this line has been quoted many times by people who may not be familiar with the source. it is the hyperbolic epitome of the "stiff upper lip" which popular culture has made of traditional british virtue and a comforting image of stoicism in the face of disaster. winston churchill quoted and paraphrased from it in his addresses during world war ii.
in the climax of the 1942 film, king's row, the poem is recited by parris mitchell (robert cummings) to friend drake mchugh (ronald reagan) in an effort to overcome the latter's depression following a permanent injury. 
outlaw country music singer/songwriter david allan coe also named a 1980 album after the poem, calling it "invictus means unconquered", reprinting the poem on the back sleeve, coupled with an original poem apparently intended as an homage and personal follow-up, to the henley original. 
the poem gained further notoriety for being quoted by the american terrorist timothy mcveigh, who used it in a communique released shortly before his execution for his role in the oklahoma city bombing. he used the full poem as his final statement in 2001. 
american terrorist eric rudolph alluded to the poem when in court for the 1996 centennial olympic park bombing in atlanta, georgia, on april 20, 2005. rudolph made the following remarks: "by the grace of god, i am still here -- a little bloodied, but emphatically unbowed". 
this poem was also used in the wb teen drama, one tree hill. 
the american flashlight company surefire uses this poem as part of an advertisement.
the poem is also the motto of bud/s class 228 in the book, "the warrior elite: the forging of seal class 228" by dick couch. it represents the indomitable spirit of the class members who finished the grueling basic underwater demolition school training in their quest to become navy seals. 
invictus is the name of a covenant of vampires in the role-playing game vampire: the requiem. the philosophy of this covenant is that power must remain with those worthy of wielding it.
nelson mandela famously quoted this poem during his prison years on robben island.
the belgian black metal band ancient rites uses the poem as lyrics to their song invictvs on the album rvbicon.
the 1982 lesbian romance novel, annie on my mind, features this poem as one read by the protagonists' english teacher.
the poem appears in dore schary's play sunrise at campobello, in which it is said to be a favorite of franklin roosevelt.
pop singer/songwriter daniel gray has named his upcoming 2007 album after the poem.
in an episode of the cosby show, you only hurt the one you love, the poem is quoted by the recently-fired mrs. granger (played by rita moreno).
a sampler in dwayne & whitley's apartment in the sitcom 'a different world' featured the last stanza, one of several poetry 