"invictus" is a short poem by the british poet william ernest henley. the title is latin for "unconquered". it was first published in 1875.

 background 

at the age of 12, henley became a victim of tuberculosis of the bone. in spite of this, in 1867 he successfully passed the oxford local examination as a senior student. his diseased foot had to be amputated directly below the knee; physicians had announced that the only way to save his life was to amputate. henley persevered and survived with one foot intact. he was discharged in 1875, and was able to lead an active life for nearly 30 years despite his disability. with an artificial foot, he lived until the age of 53. "invictus" was written from a hospital bed despite henley's condition.

verbatim
out of the night that covers me,
black as the pit from pole to pole,
i thank whatever gods may be
for my unconquerable soul.

in the fell clutch of circumstance
i have not winced nor cried aloud.
under the bludgeonings of chance
my head is bloody, but unbowed.

beyond this place of wrath and tears
looms but the horror of the shade,
and yet the menace of the years
finds and shall find me unafraid.

it matters not how strait the gate,
how charged with punishments the scroll
i am the master of my fate:
i am the captain of my soul.

popular culture references
"the soul's captain", a response to "invictus" was written by orson f. whitney, an early apostle of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints.
 kings row, a 1942 film in which the poem is recited at the climax
 think and grow rich, a self-help book by napoleon hill which uses "i am the master of my fate, i am the captain of my soul" as a motivational tool to encourage the reader to take charge of his or her life
 annie on my mind, a 1982 novel in which the poem is quoted several times throughout the book.
 one tree hill, a television show in which chad michael murray's character lucas recites the poem to his friend haley during an episode, and as a voiceover at the end
 head of the class, an 80s tv show in which howard hesseman's character charlie moore recites the final verse of the poem to mrs. russell in the season 2 episode "we love you, mrs. russell."
 buffy the vampire slayer (tv series), a television show in which harris yulin's character quentin travers (head of the watchers' council) quotes the final two lines of the poem in the episode "never leave me."
 "invictus" was also the favorite poem of louisiana governor and senator huey p. long.
 the belgian band ancient rites have a song named invictus with the poem as its lyrics.

 