"invictus" is a short poem by the english poet william ernest henley (1849–1903). it was written in 1875 and first published in 1888 in henley's book of verses, where it was the fourth in a series of poems entitled life and death (echoes). it originally bore no title: early printings contained only the dedication to r. t. h. b.—a reference to robert thomas hamilton bruce (1846–1899), a successful scottish flour merchant and baker who was also a literary patron.for example in  the familiar title "invictus" (latin for "unconquered") was added by arthur quiller-couch when he included the poem in the oxford book of english verse (1900).

 background 

at the age of 12, henley became a victim of tuberculosis of the bone. a few years later the disease progressed to his foot, and physicians announced that the only way to save his life was to amputate directly below the knee.  it was amputated at the age of 25.  in 1867 he successfully passed the oxford local examination as a senior student. in 1875 he wrote the "invictus" poem from a hospital bed. despite his disability, he survived with one foot intact and led an active life until his death at the age of 53.

text
<i>out of the night that covers me,
black as the pit from pole to pole,
i thank whatever gods may be
for my unconquerable soul.

in the fell clutch of circumstance
i have not winced nor cried aloud.
under the bludgeonings of chance
my head is bloody, but unbowed.

beyond this place of wrath and tears
looms but the horror of the shade,
and yet the menace of the years
finds and shall find me unafraid.

it matters not how strait the gate,
how charged with punishments the scroll,
i am the master of my fate:
i am the captain of my soul.

popular culture references
 invictus, a 2009 film directed by clint eastwood, starring morgan freeman and matt damon. the film is a look at the life of  nelson mandela after the fall of apartheid in south africa, during his term as president, when he campaigned to host the 1995 rugby world cup event as an opportunity to unite his countrymen. the title comes from the fact that mandela had the poem written on a scrap of paper on his prison cell while he was incarcerated.  in the movie, mandela gives the "invictus" poem to his national rugby team's captain francois pienaar before the start of the rugby world cup.  in reality, mandela provided pienaar  with an extract from theodore roosevelt's "the man in the arena" speech from 1910.
 freeman recorded a reading of the poem for the bbc, to open its coverage of the 2010 six nations championship rugby tournament, accompanied by footage from previous games and symbolic images representing the competing teams. at the conclusion, he wishes the players, "good luck gentlemen", while holding the championship trophy.
 "invictus" is the title of an album and song from the epic metal band virgin steele with many of the lyrics taking influence from the poem.
 kings row, a 1942 film in which the poem is recited at the climax.
 sunrise at campobello, a 1958 play by dore schary, made by schary into a film in 1960, in which the poem is meant to be a favorite of franklin d. roosevelt.
 think and grow rich, a self-help book by napoleon hill which uses "i am the master of my fate, i am the captain of my soul" as a motivational tool to encourage the reader to take charge of his or her life.
 annie on my mind, a 1982 novel in which the poem is quoted several times throughout the book.
 one tree hill, a television show in which chad michael murray's character lucas recites the poem to his friend haley during an episode, and as a voiceover at the end.
 head of the class, a 1980s television show in which howard hesseman's character charlie moore recites the final verse of the poem to mrs. russell in the season 2 episode "we love you, mrs. russell".
 "invictus" is the title of season 3 episode 10 of the 1980s tv series beauty and the beast.
 the poem's famous last lines hung in a painting on the wall of the set in a different world.
 "the soul's captain" is a response to "invictus". it was written by orson f. whitney, an early apostle of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints.
 buffy the vampire slayer, a television show in which harris yulin's character quentin travers (head of the watchers' council) quotes the final two lines of the poem in the episode "never leave me".
 the belgian band ancient rites have a song named "invictus" with the poem as its lyrics.
 timothy mcveigh, convicted of the oklahoma city bombing, chose "invictus" as his final statement prior to his execution in 2001.
invictus is the name of one of the covenants in the tabletop role-playing game vampire: the requiem.
in david weber's honor harrington series invictus is the name of the leading ship of a new class of superdreadnought pod layers.

shit also hit the fan 
 "if—", an inspirational poem by rudyard kipling

 