"invictus" is a short victorian poem by the english poet william ernest henley (1849–1903). it was written in 1875 and published in 1888 — originally with no title — in his first volume of poems, book of verses, in the section life and death (echoes). early printings contained a dedication to r. t. h. b.—a reference to robert thomas hamilton bruce (1846–1899), a successful scottish flour merchant, baker, and literary patron.for example in the title "invictus" (latin for "unconquered") was added by editor arthur quiller-couch when the poem was included in the oxford book of english verse.

 text 

 importance 

henley's literary reputation rests almost entirely on this single poem.university of california press http://www.jstor.org.www2.lib.ku.edu:2048/stable/3817033?seq=1 in 1875 one of henley's legs required amputation due to complications arising from tuberculosis. immediately after the amputation he was told that his other leg would require a similar procedure. he chose instead to enlist the services of the distinguished surgeon joseph lister, who was able to save henley's remaining leg after multiple surgical interventions on the foot."invictus analysis". jreed.eshs while recovering in the infirmary, he was moved to write the verses that became "invictus". this period of his life, coupled with recollections of an impoverished childhood, were primary inspirations for the poem, and play a major role in its meaning."biography of william ernest henley. poetry foundation

 influence 
 c. s. lewis included a quote from the last stanza in book 5, chapter 3 of his early autobiographical work the pilgrim's regress (1933).
 in a speech to the house of commons on 9 september 1941, winston churchill paraphrased the last two lines of the poem, stating "we are still masters of our fate. we still are captain of our souls.""famous quotations and stories". winston churchill.org.
 in the 1942 film casablanca, captain renault, an official played by claude rains, recites the last two lines of the poem when talking to rick blaine, played by humphrey bogart, referring to his power in casablanca.
 in the 1942 film kings row, parris mitchell, a psychiatrist played by robert cummings, recites the first two stanzas of "invictus" to his friend drake mchugh, played by ronald reagan, before revealing to drake that his legs were unnecessarily amputated by a cruel doctor.
 while incarcerated at robben island prison, nelson mandela recited the poem to other prisoners and was empowered by its message of self-mastery.daniels, eddie (1998) there and back 
 mandela is depicted in the movie invictus presenting a copy of the poem to francois pienaar, captain of the national south african rugby team, for inspiration during the rugby world cup — though at the actual event he gave pienaar a text of "the man in the arena" passage from theodore roosevelt's citizenship in a republic speech delivered in france in 1910.
 the poem's last stanza was quoted by us president barack obama at the end of his speech at nelson mandela's memorial service (10 december 2013) in south africa and published on the front cover of the december 14, 2013 issue of the economist.
 the heavy metal band virgin steele take influence from the poem for their 1998 release invictus. in the song of the same name, many of the lyrics take influence from the poem."invictus - virgin steele". metal archives. 
 the line "bloody, but unbowed" was the daily mirrors headline the day after the 7 july 2005 london bombings."bloodied but unbowed" mirror.co.uk the line was also quoted by lord peter wimsey in dorothy sayers' 1926 novel clouds of witness, in reference to his failure to exonerate his brother of the charge of murder.
 the burmese opposition leader and nobel peace laureate aung san suu kyi stated, "this poem had inspired my father, aung san, and his contemporaries during the independence struggle, as it also seemed to have inspired freedom fighters in other places at other times."aung san suu kyi in bbc reith lecture, 2011-06-28
 the poem was read by us pows in north vietnamese prisons. james stockdale recalls being passed the last stanza, written with rat droppings on toilet paper, from fellow prisoner david hatcher.
 the poem was used and recited often by lexxa singh in star trek: renegades
 in the video game mass effect 3, ashley williams (voiced by kimberly brooks) recites the poem's second verse in a conversation with commander shepard.

 