hedeby (haithabu in old norse; heidiba in latin; in germany the name haithabu is frequently used) was a danish settlement and trading centre on the southern baltic sea coast of the jutland peninsula at the head of a narrow, navigable inlet, the schlei (danish: slien) in the province of schleswig-holstein, northern germany. the name means the "town on the heath". 

it was the biggest nordic city during the viking age and is regarded as the oldest city of denmark. it is first mentioned in the chronicles of einhard (804) who was in the service of charlemagne. the oldest town in modern denmark is ribe, first mentioned in 854. denmark lost the territory on which hedeby was located to austria and prussia in 1864 in the second war of schleswig.

hedeby was a danish settlement built around 770. it was surrounded on its three landward sides (north, west, and south) by an earthwork, which was part of the danevirke border wall. in the 9th century a second settlement developed to the north with the hedeby creek between the two. at the end of the 9th century the northern and southern parts of the town were abandoned for the central section. later a 9-metre (29-ft) high semi-circular wall was erected to guard the western approaches to the town. on the eastern side, the town was bordered by the innermost part of the schlei and the bay of haddebyer noor (danish: haddeby nor).

hedeby became a principal marketplace because of its geographical location on the major trade routes between germany and scandinavia, and between the baltic and the north sea. between 800 and 1000 the growing economic power of the vikings led to its dramatic expansion as a major trading centre. as adam of bremen reports, ships were sent from this portus maritimus to the slavic areas, to sweden, samland (semlant) and even greece. it was the seat of a bishop and belonged to the archbishopric of hamburg and bremen.

a swedish dynasty founded by olof the brash is said to have ruled hedeby during the last decades of the 9th century and the first part of the 10th century. this was told to adam of bremen by the danish king sweyn estridsson, and it is supported by three runestones found in denmark. two of them were raised by the mother of olof's grand-son sigtrygg gnupasson. the third runestone is from hedeby, the stone of eric (swedish: erikstenen) and it was discovered in 1796, which shows norwegian-swedish runes. it is, however, possible that danes also occasionally wrote with this version of the younger futhark.

the town was sacked in 1050 by king harold hardrada of norway during the course of a conflict with king sweyn ii of denmark: a norwegian skald, himself quoted by snorri sturluson, describes the sack as follows: 
burnt in anger from end to end was hedeby [..]
high rose the flames from the houses when, before dawn, i stood upon the stronghold's arm

after hedeby had been sacked by harold, it was in 1066 plundered by slavs. the inhabitants moved to schleswig and hedeby was abandoned.

