thumb|250px|right|īao valley

the īao valley is a lush, stream cut valley in west maui,  hawaiian islands located 5 km (3 mi) west of wailuku, at . īao means "cloud supreme".  because of its natural beauty it has become one of hawaii's most popular locations to visit on maui.

 īao valley state monument 
thumb|left|200px|the īao needle. it looks short despite its 1200 ft elevation because nothing is next to it for scale.

the state park is located on 6.2 acres (2.5 hectares) at the end of īao valley road (highway 32).  the īao needle is a famous landmark in the state park. īao is pronounced similar to "yeow." it is a lava remnant rising 1200 feet (365 m) into the air 2250 ft (685 m) measured from sea level), covered with vegetation.  the needle is surrounded by the cliffs of  the dormant volcano, puu kukui. one can take a short trail to a windy overlook for some good views.  park hours are from 7 am to 7 pm.

 rainforest 

īao  valley is considered to be the second wettest spot in the state, after mount waialeale on kauai.  the valley and the surrounding west maui mountains can receive more than 400 inches (more than 10,000 mm) per year which ends up flowing into the īao stream. trails in the state park run alongside īao  stream and through the forest, making it a nice place for a short hike, if you don't mind the chance of getting wet.thumb|250px|right|īao stream

 history 

the hawaiian god kane is considered to be the procreator and the provider of life.  he is associated with wai (fresh water) as well as clouds, rain, streams and springs. kanaloa, the hawaiian god of the underworld, is represented by the phallic stone of the īao needle.  

during the late 15th century, īao  valley was designated as an alii burial area by kakae, the ruler of maui and oahu.  the remains of the chiefs were buried in secret hiding places in the valley.  in 1790 the valley was the site of the battle of kepaniwai.  it was the battle in which kamehameha the great  defeated king kalanikupule and conquered the maui army in order to unify the islands.  the battle was said to be so bloody that dead bodies blocked the īao stream, and in turn, the battle site was named kepaniwai ("damming of the waters").

 kepaniwai park's heritage gardens 

since 1952, kepaniwai park's heritage gardens have memorialized the multicultural history of maui.  scale models of ethnic buildings and gardens representing the immigration of caucasians, filipinos, hawaiians, japanese, and portuguese cultures are the highlight of the park.  the gardens were restored in 1994.

