 an infusion is a beverage made by steeping a flavoring substance in hot or boiling water. infusions include coffee, tea and tisanes. infusions can also be made in another substance, such as alcohol or vinegar, instead of water.
 in medicine an infusion is a treatment in which a patient is attached to a device (a drip) that constantly delivers a liquid into the bloodstream. see route of administration for some further details.
 an infusion in the world of aromatherapy refers to two different types or infusions of herbs, flowers, berries, etc. being "infused" or placed in oil. there are short-term infusions which are most popularly used and sold on the open market today. these short-term infusions are made anywhere from 24 hours to just under 3 weeks. then the herb/botanical is removed from the oil and the oil is used in the many formulas that call for short-term infused oils. long-term infused oils are made in the same way as the short-term infusions except that these infusions are allowed to set for a minimum of one year or longer before opening in order to have a more concentrated infused oil that is used similar to an essential oil by the drop rather than by the ounce as one would use a short-term infused oil. long-term infused oils are prized for their vibrant colors, concentration, and their ability to be used with or without essential oils as well as their long shelf life. the first use of infused oils is lost in the mists of history and these infused oils preceed the use of essential oils by thousands of years. the first essential oils being made in the 10th century by an arab chemist, avicennia. infusions were the oils that the common man or woman used in daily life. today they are just now begining to be researched again. because they are not patenable, there has been very little research done in this area of infusions. 
 in other contexts, an infusion can mean the introduction of a modifying quality or element. thus it could be used to describe the addition of new subject matter into a curriculum, or the addition of talented individuals into an organization.
 infusion is an australian dance-music act.
 infusion development is a software consulting company and author of the codenotes book series.
 a recognized form of christian baptism (pouring over the head).

de:aufgussgetränk
fr:infusion
it:infuso