hematitethumb|center|hematite
center|thumb|200px|hematite carving, 5 cm (2 in) long.generalcategorymineralchemical formula iron(iii) oxide, fe2o3, α-fe2o3identification colour  metallic grey to earthy red crystal habit  tabular to thick crystals crystal system  hexagonal (rhombohedral) cleavage none fracture uneven to sub-conchoidal mohs scale hardness  5.5 - 6.5 luster metallic to splendent refractive index opaque pleochroism none streak bright red to dark red specific gravity 4.9 - 5.3 fusibility ? solubility ?major varieties specularite

hematite (ae) or haematite (be) is the mineral form of iron(iii) oxide, (fe2o3), one of several iron oxides. hematite crystallizes in the rhombohedral system, and it has the same crystal structure as ilmenite and as corundum. hematite and ilmenite form a complete solid solution at temperatures above 950°c. 

left|thumb|200px|hematite (kidney ore) from michigan

hematite is a very common mineral, coloured black to steel or silver-gray, brown to reddish brown, or red. it is mined as the main ore of iron. varieties include bloodstone, iron rose, kidney ore, martite, paint ore, specularite (specular hematite), rainbow hematite and titano-hematite. while the forms of hematite vary, they all have a rust-red streak. hematite is harder than pure iron, but much more brittle. when shaped into ornaments, it is often called black diamond.

huge deposits of hematite are found in banded iron formations. grey hematite is typically found in places where there has been standing water or mineral hot springs, such as those in yellowstone. the mineral can precipitate out of water and collect in layers at the bottom of a lake, spring, or other standing water. but hematite can also occur without water, as the result of volcanic activity.

clay-sized hematite crystals can also occur as a secondary mineral formed by weathering processes in soil, and along with other iron oxides or oxyhydroxides such as goethite, is responsible for the red color of many tropical, ancient, or otherwise highly weathered soils.

the name hematite is derived from the greek word for blood, since sometimes hematite can be red, as in rouge, a powderized form of hematite. it shares this root with the word hemoglobin. hemoglobin is the oxygen-transporting molecule in red blood cells, the iron of which causes blood to be red. the color of hematite lends it well in use as a pigment.

left|thumb|200px|rainbow hematite from brazil

especially nice specimens of hematite come from england, mexico, brazil, australia and the lake superior region of the united states and canada.

hematite is an antiferromagnetic material below the morin transition at 260k, and a canted antiferromagnet or weakly ferromagnetic above the morin transition.
.

hematite on mars

hematite can be formed by aquaeous processes, weathering processes, or without water. in 2004, nasa's mars rover opportunity discovered small spheres ("blueberries") believed to be made partly or mostly of hematite. the spheres are only a few millimeters in diameter and are believed to have formed as rock deposits under watery conditions billions of years ago when mars was a wetter world. the rover used one of its instruments (a mössbauer spectrometer) to test the spherules iron content which were then unequivocally identified as hematite.

hematite in popular culture
since polished hematite is considered by many to be a gemstone, it has been used in jewelry over the course of the last 50 years in north america, especially in the western united states. hematite can be found used in jewelry and art created by the native americans. also part of the hippie movement of the 1960s included the eclectic mix-match of differing styles of clothing and accessories, and hematite, due to its uniqueness, became popular.  many hippies today still wear this stone as a regular part of their wardrobe.

