+polish history seriespolish statehood  50px|kingdom of poland (piasts)
kingdom of poland (jagiellonian)
polish-lithuanian commonwealth 
duchy of warsaw 
congress poland 
free city of krak贸w 
kingdom of poland 
second polish republic
polish government-in-exile 
people's republic of poland
poland

the second polish republic is an unofficial name applied to the republic of poland between world war i and world war ii. the borders of the state were fixed in 1921, it had an area of 388.6 thousand sq. km. (6th place in europe), and 27.2 million inhabitants at the census of that year. in 1939, just before the outbreak of world war ii, it had an estimated 35.1 million inhabitants. a third of these were national minorities (10% jews, 17% ukrainians and belarusians, 5% germans, and 1% percent lithuanians, russians and czechs).

occupied by german and austro-hungarian armies in the summer of 1915, the formerly russian-ruled part of poland was proclaimed an independent kingdom by the occupying powers on 5 november 1916, with a governing council of state and (from 15 october 1917) a regency council (rada regencyjna) to administer the country under german auspices pending the election of a king. 

shortly before the end of world war i, on 7 october 1918, the regency council dissolved the council of state and announced its intention to restore polish independence. with the notable exception of the marxist-oriented social democratic party of the kingdom of poland and lithuania (sdkpil), most political parties supported this move. on 23 october the council appointed a new government under j贸zef swierzynski and began conscription into the polish army.

on 5 november, in lublin, the first soviet of delegates was created. on 6 november the communists announced the creation of a republic of tarnobrzeg. the same day, a provisional people's government of the republic of poland was created under the socialist, ignacy daszynski.

on 10 november jozef pilsudski, newly freed from imprisonment by the german authorities at magdeburg, returned to warsaw.  next day, due to his popularity and support from most political parties, the regency council appointed pildudski commander in chief of the polish armed forces. on 14 november the council dissolved itself and transferred all its authority to pilsudski as chief of state (naczelnik panstwa).

centers of government that were created in galicia (formerly austrian-ruled southern poland) included a national council of the principality of cieszyn (created on 19 november) and a polish liquidation committee (created on 28 october). soon afterward, conflict broke out in lviv (polish lw贸w) between forces of the military committee of ukrainians and the polish "eagles" of lw贸w.

after consultation with pilsudski, daszynski's government dissolved itself and a new government was created under jedrzej moraczewski. 

elections to the sejm - 26 january 1919.

war against the soviets:  polish-soviet war.

uprisings in wielkopolska and silesia. great poland uprising.

15 july 1920 - agrarian reform.

17 march 1921 - march constitution.

election to sejm and senat - november 1922.

president gabriel narutowicz, and his assassination (16 december 1922).

grabski government.

president wojciechowski - 20 december 1922, to zamach majowy.

coup of may 1926 = zamach majowy.

