de:geschichte russlands
it:storia della russia
pl:historia rosji
zh-cn:俄罗斯历史
sv:rysslands historia

the earliest slavic state in the region was that of the kievan rus. in the later middle ages it was the muscovy principality that developed into an empire that from the 15th century onward slowly grew eastward into asia. under the tsars, russia then became a major european power as imperial russia modernized and expanded westward from the 18th century onward. however, at the start of the 20th century russia's power was declining and growing dissatisfaction amongst the population, combined with the military failure during world war i led to the russian revolution in 1917 that was followed by the proclamation of the soviet union under bolshevik leader vladimir lenin, and the russian civil war, in which the communist or red forces defeated the tsarist or white forces.

the subsequent reign of the de facto dictator joseph stalin would claim millions of lives, as known or suspected political opponents and military officers were executed or exiled to siberia, beginning from the great purges of the 1930s, and until the very death of stalin. stalin applied drastic measures to recover the the economy of country, known as collectivization and industrialization in the history of the ussr.

following the soviet victory over nazi germany during world war ii, the soviet union would also develop into a dominant world power during the cold war, functioning as the main ideological adversary to the united states. the two superpowers engaged in a lengthy geopolitical struggle by proxy for control of the hearts and minds of the third world following the 1956 suez crisis. the soviets created the warsaw pact to oppose nato, and the two sides engaged in a lengthy and expensive arms race to stockpile more nuclear weapons than the other had. in 1962, the cuban missile crisis nearly triggered a war between the ussr and the united states, when soviet leader nikita khrushchev placed offensive nuclear weapons in cuba. the soviets also were engaged in the space race against the usa. they launched sputnik, the first satellite to orbit the earth, and col. yuri gagarin, the first human to orbit the earth.

by the late 1980s, soviet leader mikhail gorbachev implemented reforms to convert the command-economy-based soviet-type socialism system of eastern europe to a democracy based on capitalism. he summarized his policies by the words glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring). but his measures caused catastrophic socio-economic conditions in eastern europe culminating in the collapse of the soviet union after a failed military coup in 1991. the russian soviet federal republic declared its sovereignty of the russian federation on june 12, 1990. the ussr was officially dissolved on december 26, 1991. russia, as the soviet union's primary successor state, has since sought to maintain its global influence, but has been hampered by economic difficulties.

related histories
history of belarus
history of estonia
history of finland
history of latvia
history of lithuania
history of poland
history of ukraine
volhynia
polovtsians

related articles
eastern orthodoxy
history of europe
history of asia
russian colonization of the americas
history of present-day nations and states.
list of famous russians
tsar
varangian
primary chronicle
freising manuscripts
the tale of igor's campaign