de:geschichte russlands
it:storia della russia
pl:historia rosji
zh-cn:俄罗斯历史
sv:rysslands historia

early east slavs
for details see the main article early east slavs.

kievan rus' (800-1240)
for details see the main article kievan rus'.

the earliest slavic state in the region was that of the kievan rus. according to icelandic sagas and runestones, the name of little russia (=ukraine) and great russia was "gardariki". the country was divided in three parts: holmgård (novgorod), könugård (kiev) and palteskja (polatsk). kiev shall have been the best land in the whole country. the parts outside these was by the norsemen seen as tatars' land. exports of slaves, furs, honey and wax contributed to kievs and novgorods growth. the towns were competitors to the rest of europe's large cities in size, wealthness and architectonical impressions. at 998 the region went christianity by st. vladimir and some years later the first laws, ruskaia pravda, was introduced. russian language has astonishly little influenced from greek and latin, and the main reason is that the slavic was used directly in church language instead of the formers.

the name "russia", which is together with the finnish routsi and estonian rootsi, are found having relationship with roden. the meaning rus is debated but it comes from ros in the term "roden", and is traditionally taken to be "oar". however, some scholars belive it instead have the meaning from the path "boost" or "drunk".

volga bulgaria

volga bulgaria was a non-slavic extinct state on the middle volga. after mongol invasion it became a part of golden horde. nowdays tatarstan.

khazaria

khazaria was a non-slavic extinct state of steppes between the caspian sea and black sea and partially along the volga river, which is traditionally considered to be a symbol of russia today, along with the birch tree. 

 mongol invasion (1240-1480) 

for details see the main article mongol invasion of russia.

muscovy
for details see the main article muscovy.

in the later middle ages it was the muscovy principality that developed into an empire that from the 15th century onward slowly grew eastward into asia.

imperial russia
for details see the main article imperial russia.

under the tsars, russia then became a major european power as imperial russia expanded westward from the 18th century onward.

revolutionary activity in russia began with the decembrist revolt, uncovered in 1825, and although serfdom was abolished in 1861, its abolition was achieved on terms unfavorable to the peasants and served to encourage revolutionaries.

russian revolution
for details see the main article russian revolution.

a parliament, the duma, was established in 1906, but political and social unrest continued and was aggravated during world war i by military defeat and food shortages. the february revolution and october revolutions (see russian revolution) brought the bolsheviks to power in 1917.

russian civil war
for details see the main article russian civil war.

the russian revolution was followed by a period of civil war (see russian civil war), after which communist control was complete.

soviet union
for details see the main article history of the soviet union.

the collapse of tsarist rule was followed by the eviction of the landlord class and the subdivision of land among peasant families. poor and middle peasants generally did not benefit from the latter until lenin announced the new economic policy (nep), which saw an end to government requisitioning of food during the civil war. peasants marketed most of their produce at free prices during the years of the nep.

after the death of the soviet union's revolutionary founding figure vi lenin (1924), joseph stalin finally emerged as uncontested leader when leon trotsky had been exiled from the soviet union in 1929.

under stalin, who replaced lenin's nep with five year plans and collective farming, the soviet union (established 1922) became a major industrial power, but with effective political opposition eliminated during the 1930s by purges. world war ii established the soviet union as one of the two major world powers, a position maintained for four decades through military strength, aid to developing countries, and scientific research, especially into space technology and weaponry. growing tensions between the soviet union and the united states, its former wartime ally and the other superpower, led to the cold war.

communist party general secretary mikhail gorbachev promoted soviet glasnost (openness) and perestroika (economic restructuring). a u.s.-soviet summit meeting in 1986 and 1987 and a meeting of u.s. president ronald reagan and gorbachev in late 1988 brought arms control cuts in europe.

russian federation
for details see the main article history of post-communist russia.

as the russian republic's boris yeltsin eclipsed soviet leader mikhail gorbachev in power, the disintegration of communist allies in eastern europe eventually triggered the peaceful dissolution of the soviet union in 1991 and the independence of the russian federation.

related histories
history of belarus
history of estonia
history of finland
history of latvia
history of lithuania
history of poland
history of ukraine
volga bulgaria
volhynia
polovtsians

related articles
eastern orthodoxy
history of europe
history of asia
russian colonization of the americas
history of present-day nations and states.
list of famous russians
tsar
varangian
primary chronicle
freising manuscripts
the tale of igor's campaign