herman of alaska (born 1756 or 1760 in serpukhov, russia – december 13, 1837 on spruce island, alaska) was the first saint to be canonized by the orthodox church in america.

biography

st. herman was born in the town of serpukhov in the moscow diocese around 1756. at 16, he entered the russian orthodox monastic life at the trinity-st. sergius hermitage near st. petersburg. 

while there he developed a severe throat infection or abscess. after fervent prayer before an icon of the theotokos, he collapsed into a deep sleep. during this sleep, he was greeted by the virgin mother of lord jesus and healed. upon waking the next day, there was no trace of the past infirmity. approximately five years later he transferred from trinity-st. sergius hermitage to valaam monastery. while at valaam, he was under the spiritual guidance of abbot nazarius who had played a significant role in the revitalization of spiritual life in russia. during this time, the head of the golikov-shelikov company, gregory shelikov, visited valaam and made a request for several monks to begin a mission into the alaskan territory. father herman was selected, along with seven other monks.

father herman and the other monks arrived on kodiak island on september 24, 1794. the monks educated and converted the native aleuts, and as time progressed they found themselves protecting the natives from exploitation and abuse. because of this moral stance the monks themselves were abused, arrested and physically threatened. in time, enduring hardship, inclement weather, illness and more, father herman stood as the only remainder from the original band of missionaries.

father herman felt it his duty to protect the aleuts from exploitation. he defended them against the often cruel treatment of those who controlled the colony. his concern for their needs have been documented, expressed in letters sent to the former administrator of the colony, simeon yanovsky. father herman also would intercede before the governors on behalf of the oppressed. he helped those in need in whatever way he found possible. 

between the years of 1808 and 1818, father herman traveled to spruce island. spruce island is almost completely covered by forest and is separated by a strait about a mile and a quarter wide from kodiak island. selecting this island for the location of his hermitage he called the land there "new valaam" after the monastery from which he had left to come to america. he dug a cave in the ground and lived out his first full summer there. to endure the harsh winters he constructed a cell in which he lived for more than forty years. 

a small chapel was built as well, along with a school and guest house. the local people would visit him often. food was produced from an experimental garden he planted for himself and the orphans of the land. he devoted his life to prayer and to performing the services he could do as a simple monk who had not been ordained.

his love for the people of alaska was sincere and he found happiness in being around the children. an epidemic plagued alaskans when an american ship made land at kodiak. fr. herman remained with the ill and dying, offering them constant comfort and ceaseless prayer. it is said that his love was so genuine that he could see into the hearts of his spiritual children and help them.

the natives regarded him as their intercessor before god. when there was a tidal wave on the island, fr. herman took an icon of the theotokos, placed it on the beach and assured the people that the water would not rise beyond the place where the icon was, and it did not. when there was a great fire on the island, it is said that he dug a trench and stayed the flames. prior to his death he foretold that there would be no priest to bury him and that he would be forgotten for 30 years. he died on november 15, 1837, but was not buried until december 13, and was forgotten until the first investigation of his life in 1867 by bishop peter of alaska. this investigation was followed by publications of his life in 1894, 1900, and 1952. in 1952 an akathist hymn (devotional song, prayer or chant) was composed in his honor.

sainthood
on march 11, 1969, the great council of bishops solemnly proclaimed the act of the universal church canonization of the staretz herman to sainthood in the orthodox church in america: "taking into consideration the long and undisputed witness of the grace of god, appearing through the servant of god, the staretz herman of alaska." 
the glorification of father herman was performed on august 9, 1970.

