the foreign relations of the republic of ireland substantially reflect the fact that it is a member of the european union ("eu") and that, like all members of the eu, it holds the presidency for six months every twelfth year or so.  it is one of the group of smaller nations in the union.

for many years, ireland was a member of the non-aligned movement group in the united nations ("un") and even today tends towards independence of view in its foreign policy.  specifically, it is not a member of nato and has a longstanding  policy of military neutrality.  this policy has helped the irish defence forces to be sucessful in their contributions to un peace-keeping missions since 1960 (in the congo crisis) and subsequently in cyprus, lebanon and bosnia and herzegovina. the present government has adopted a more evidently pro-us position, volunteering shannon airport as a stop-over point for us forces en-route to iraq.  given the large volume of inward investment by us companies, this is perhaps understandable.

the state involved in a number of outstanding international disputes. since the adoption of the constitution of ireland in 1937, the state had been involved in a dispute with the united kingdom over the status of northern ireland. articles 2 and 3 of the republic's constitution used to claim northern ireland as a part of the irish nation, though in practice the irish government did recognise the border. however both nations concluded the belfast agreement on the issue in 1998 and now co-operate closely to find a solution to the region's problems. articles 2 and 3 were amended as part of this agreement and replaced with a statement of aspiration to unite the people of the island of ireland and not specifically become one state.

the state is also a party to the rockall continental shelf dispute that also involves denmark, iceland, and the united kingdom. the republic and the united kingdom have signed a boundary agreement in the rockall area.  however, neither have concluded similar agreements with iceland or denmark (on behalf of the faroe islands) and the matter remains under negotiation. iceland now claims  a substantial area of the continental shelf to the west of ireland, to a point 49°48'n 19°00'w, which is further south than ireland! 

the irish government has sought, with mixed success, to prevent the importation of weapons and ammunition through the state by the illegal ira, for use in their conflict with the security forces in northern ireland. in the 1970's the irish warship, the lé clara intercepted a ship carrying weapons from libya which were more than likely destined for the republican terrorists. law enforcement acts such as these additionally improved relations with the government of the united kingdom.

