de:hunter s. thompson
thompson, hunter s. thompson, hunter s.

hunter stockton thompson (born july 18, 1937, louisville, kentucky) is an american journalist and author.

thompson frequently refers to himself as "raoul duke" or "dr. gonzo."  he received his certification from a mail-order church in the sixties.

thompson, originally a sports journalist writing for various publications, worked for rolling stone magazine during the late 1960s and 1970s, and has published several books and numerous articles.  he is noted for the creation of gonzo journalism, a writing style that combines extravagance, including the use of diverse and sometimes multiple recreational drugs, and his eccentric personality.

thompson's style of reportage meshes fact with drug-sotted fantasy, the most typical example of which being fear and loathing in las vegas. published in 1971, fear and loathing in las vegas is a travelogue of thompson's trek (along with his attorney, oscar zeta acosta) to cover a narcotics officers' convention in nevada and the "fabulous mint 400" motorcycle race. instead, thompson and acosta wind up on a search for the american dream in las vegas, with the aid of heroic amounts of lsd, ether, adrenochrome, and numerous other drugs.

some of thompson's other books include fear and loathing on the campaign trail '72, a collection of rolling stone articles he wrote while covering the campaigns of president richard m. nixon and his unsuccessful opponent, senator george mcgovern, and hell's angels, an account of his travels with the infamous motorcycle gang. his latest book, kingdom of fear, is an angry commentary on the passing of the american century. thompson currently writes a web column, "hey rube," for espn. he has at times also toured on the lecture circuit, once with john belushi.

cartoonist garry trudeau based his doonesbury character uncle duke on thompson, to loud protests from thompson himself.

a slogan of thompson's, "when the going gets weird, the weird turn pro," appears as a chapter heading in fear and loathing in las vegas.
other closely related gonzo journalists include timothy edward jones, author of the highly acclaimed book european confessio.

thompson is an admitted fan of firearms and is known to keep a keg of gunpowder in his basement.

bibliography
better than sex: confessions of a political junkie
fear and loathing on the campaign trail 72
fear and loathing in america the brutal odyssey of an outlaw journalist 1968-1976
fear and loathing in las vegas a savage journey to the heart of the american dream
fear and loathing in las vegas, and other american stories
the fear and loathing letters
generation of swine: tales of shame and degradation in the 80's
the great shark hunt: strange tales from a strange time
hell's angels: a strange and terrible saga
kingdom of fear: loathsome secrets of a star-crossed child in the final days of the american century
the proud highway: saga of a desperate southern gentleman, vol. 1
the rum diary: the long lost novel
screwjack and other stories.

external link
the great thompson hunt