right|hunter s. thompson

hunter stockton thompson (born louisville, kentucky july 18, 1937) is an american journalist and author.

thompson frequently refers to himself as "raoul duke" or "dr. gonzo."  he received his certification from a mail-order church in the sixties.

thompson, originally a sports journalist writing for various publications, worked for rolling stone magazine during the late 1960s and 1970s, and has published several books and numerous articles.  he is noted for the creation of gonzo journalism, a writing style that combines extravagance, including the use of diverse and sometimes multiple recreational drugs, and his eccentric personality.

thompson's style of reportage meshes fact with drug-sotted fantasy, the archetypal example being fear and loathing in las vegas. published in 1971, fear and loathing in las vegas is a first-person account by a journalist of a trip to las vegas with his "300-pound samoan" attorney to cover a narcotics officers' convention and the "fabulous mint 400" motorcycle race. during the trip the journalist and his lawyer become sidetracked by a search for the american dream, with the aid of heroic amounts of lsd, ether, adrenochrome, ibogaine and numerous other drugs. the journalist and the attorney are never named, but they are obviously thinly-diguised versions of thompson himself, and his friend and lawyer oscar zeta acosta.

some of thompson's other books include fear and loathing on the campaign trail '72, a collection of rolling stone articles he wrote while covering the campaigns of president richard m. nixon and his unsuccessful opponent, senator george mcgovern, and hell's angels, an account of his travels with the infamous motorcycle gang. his latest book, kingdom of fear, is an angry commentary on the passing of the american century. thompson currently writes a web column, "hey rube," for espn. he has at times also toured on the lecture circuit, once with john belushi.

cartoonist garry trudeau based his doonesbury character uncle duke on thompson, to loud protests from thompson himself. similarly, spider jerusalem, the gonzo journalist protagonist of warren ellis's transmetropolitan, is (more lovingly) based on thompson.

in 1970, thompson made an unsuccessful bid for sheriff of pitkin county, colorado.  he ran on a platform promoting decriminalization of drugs and the sale thereof, and renaming aspen, colorado as "fat city."  the republican sheriff against whom he ran had a crew cut, prompting thompson to shave his head bald and refer to his opposition as "my long haired opponent."

a slogan of thompson's, "when the going gets weird, the weird turn pro," appears as a chapter heading in fear and loathing in las vegas. he has also been quoted as saying "i hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence or insanity to anyone, but they've always worked for me."

thompson is an admitted fan of firearms and is known to keep a keg of gunpowder in his basement.

bibliography
better than sex: confessions of a political junkie
fear and loathing: on the campaign trail '72
fear and loathing in america: the brutal odyssey of an outlaw journalist 1968-1976
fear and loathing in las vegas: a savage journey to the heart of the american dream
fear and loathing in las vegas, and other american stories
the fear and loathing letters
generation of swine: tales of shame and degradation in the 80's
the great shark hunt: strange tales from a strange time
hell's angels: a strange and terrible saga
kingdom of fear: loathsome secrets of a star-crossed child in the final days of the american century
the proud highway: saga of a desperate southern gentleman, vol. 1
the rum diary: the long lost novel
screwjack and other stories.
hey rube: blood sport, the bush doctrine, and the downward spiral of dumbness, modern history from the sports desk
the curse of lono, illustrated by ralph steadman (bantam books, 1983)

external link
the great thompson hunt

thompson, hunter s
thompson, hunter s.

de:hunter s. thompson