the indo-iranian language group constitutes the easternmost extant branch of the indo-european family of languages. it consists of three language groups: the indo-aryan (including  dardic), iranian and  nuristani. the term aryan languages is  occasionally still used to refer to the indo-iranian languages numeral types and changes worldwide, by jadranka (edt) gvozdanovic, language arts & disciplines,1999, page 221. the speakers of the proto-indo-iranian language, the hypothetical proto-indo-iranians, are usually associated with the late 3rd millennium bc sintashta-petrovka culture of central asia. their expansion is believed to have been connected with the invention of the chariot. 

the contemporary indo-iranian languages form the largest sub-branch of indo-european, with more than one billion speakers in total, stretching from europe (romani) and the caucasus (ossetian) to xinjiang (sariqoli) and  east india. sil in a 2005 estimate counts a total of 308 varieties, the largest in terms of native speakers being hindustani (hindi and urdu, ca. 540 million), bengali (ca. 200 million), punjabi (ca. 80 million),
marathi and persian (ca. 70 million each), gujarati (ca. 45 million), pashto (40 million), oriya (ca. 30 million), kurdish (ca. 40 million) and sindhi (ca. 20 million ).

indo-iranian languages were once spoken across a wider area still. the scythians were described by roman writer strabo as inhabiting the lands to the north of the black sea in present-day ukraine, moldova and romania. the river-names don, dnieper, danube etc. are of indo-iranian origin. the so-called migration period saw indo-iranian languages disappear from eastern europe with the arrival of the turkic-speaking pechenegs and others by the eighth century ad.

subdivisions

iranian group:
eastern iranian
northeastern
 avestan (extinct)
 scythian (extinct)
 saka (extinct)
 ossetian
 sariqoli
 sogdian (extinct)
 yaghnobi
 bactrian (extinct)
southeastern
 pashto
 pamiri
western iranian
northwestern
 dari language of zoroastrians
 balochi
 gilaki
 kurdish
 mazanadarani (tapurian)
 parthian
 talysh
 deilami
 zazaki
southwestern ("persid")
 old persian (extinct) 
 middle persian (extinct) 
 new persian (spoken in iran, afghanistan, pakistan and tajikistan)
 luri / bakhtiari
 tat

indo-aryan group:
 vedic sanskrit
 sanskrit
 pāli
 central zone
 hindustani
 hindi
 urdu
 romani/romany
 eastern zone (magadhan prakrit languages)
 angika
 assamese
 bengali
 bhojpuri
 magadhi
 maithili
 oriya
 northern zone (pahari languages)
 nepali
 northwestern zone
 dardic languages (sometimes still classified separately):
 dameli
 domaaki
 gawar-bati
 kalsha-mun
 kashmiri
 khowar
 kohistani
 ningalami
 pashayi
 palula
 shina
 shumashti
 punjabi
 sindhi
 khojki
 kutchi
 rajasthani
 southern zone
 dhivehi / mahl
 sinhala
 western zone
 gujarati
 konkani
 marathi

nuristani languages:
 ashkunu (ashkun)
 kamkata-viri (bashgali)
 vasi-vari (prasuni)
 tregami
 kalasha-ala (waigali)

