the indo-iranian language group constitutes the easternmost extant branch of the indo-european family of languages. it consists of three language groups: the indo-aryan, iranian (irano-aryan) and nuristani. the term aryan languages is occasionally still used to refer to the indo-iranian languagesnumeral types and changes worldwide, by jadranka (edt) gvozdanovic, language arts & disciplines,1999, page 221. the speakers of the proto-indo-iranian language, the hypothetical proto-indo-iranians, are usually associated with the late 3rd millennium bc andronovo/sintashta-petrovka culture of central asia. their expansion is believed to have been connected with the invention of the chariot.

the contemporary indo-iranian languages form the largest sub-branch of indo-european, with more than one billion speakers in total, stretching from europe (romani) and the caucasus (ossetian) to xinjiang (sarikoli) and bangladesh. sil in a 2005 estimate counts a total of 308 varieties, the largest in terms of native speakers being hindustani (hindi and urdu, ca. 540 million), bengali (ca. 240 million), punjabi (ca. 120 million),
marathi and persian (ca. 70 million each), gujarati (ca. 45 million), pashto (40 million), oriya (ca. 30 million), kurdish (ca. 40 million) and sindhi (ca. 20 million).

indo-iranian languages were once spoken across a wider area still. the scythians were described by roman writer strabo as inhabiting the lands to the north of the black sea in present-day ukraine, moldova and romania. the river-names don, dnieper, danube etc. are of indo-iranian origin. the so-called migration period saw indo-iranian languages disappear from eastern europe with the arrival of the turkic-speaking pechenegs and others by the eighth century ad.

the oldest attested indo-iranian languages are vedic sanskrit (ancient indian), avestan and old persian (two ancient iranian languages). but there are written instances of a fourth language in northern mesopotamia  which is considered to be  indo-aryan. they are attested in documents from the ancient empire of mitanni  and the hittites of anatolia. 

subdivisions

iranian group:
eastern iranian 
northeastern
avestan (extinct)
scythian (extinct)
sakan (extinct)
ossetian
sogdian (extinct)
yaghnobi
bactrian (extinct)
southeastern
pashto
pamiri
sarikoli
ormurri-parachi
western iranian
northwestern
dari language of zoroastrians
balochi
gilaki
kurdish
mazanadarani (tapurian)
parthian (extinct)
talysh
deilami
zazaki
southwestern ("persid")
old persian (extinct)
middle persian (extinct)
new persian (eastern & western dialects) 
 tajik persian
luri / bakhtiari
tati

indo-aryan group:
vedic sanskrit
sanskrit
pāli
central zone
hindustani
hindi
urdu
romani/romany
eastern zone (magadhan prakrit languages)
angika
assamese
bengali
bhojpuri
magahi
maithili
oriya
northern zone (pahari languages)
nepali
northwestern zone
dardic languages (sometimes still classified separately):
dameli
domaaki
gawar-bati
kalasha-mun
kashmiri
khowar
kohistani
ningalami
pashayi
palula
shina
shumashti
punjabi
sindhi
khojki
kutchi
rajasthani
southern zone (also known as insular indo-aryan)
dhivehi / mahl
sinhala
western zone
gujarati
konkani
marathi

nuristani languages:
ashkunu (ashkun)
kamkata-viri (bashgali)
vasi-vari (prasuni)
tregami
kalasha-ala (waigali)

