the indo-iranian languages, also known as the aryan languages, constitute the easternmost extant branch of the indo-european language family. it is also the largest branch, with more than a billion speakers stretching from europe (romani) and the caucasus (ossetian) eastward to xinjiang (sarikoli) and assam (assamese) and south to sri lanka (sinhalese).

languages
indo-iranian consists of three groups: 
indo-aryan
iranian
nuristani

the largest in terms of native speakers are hindustani (hindi–urdu, ca. 240 million), bengali (205 million), punjabi (100 million), marathi (75 million), persian (60 million), pashto (ca. 50 million), gujarati (50 million), kurdish (20 million), bhojpuri (40 million), awadhi (40 million), maithili (35 million), oriya (35 million), marwari (30 million), sindhi (25 million), rajasthani (20 million), chhattisgarhi (18 million), assamese (15 million), sinhalese (16 million), and rangpuri (15 million).

ethnologue lists two unclassified indo-iranian languages: luwati language and badeshi language. the latter has not been confirmed to exist.

history
indo-iranian languages were once spoken across a still wider area. the scythians were described by roman writer strabo as inhabiting the lands to the north of the black sea in present-day ukraine, moldova and romania. the river-names don, dnieper, danube etc. are possibly of indo-iranian origin. the so-called migration period saw indo-iranian languages disappear from eastern europe, apart from the ancestors of ossetian in the caucasus, with the arrival of the turkic-speaking pechenegs and others by the eighth century ad. 

sanskrit was widely spoken throughout southeast asia from 7th century onwards  due to indian trade and colonization.

the oldest attested indo-iranian languages are vedic sanskrit (ancient indo-aryan), older and younger avestan and old persian (ancient iranian languages). but there are written instances of a fourth language in northern mesopotamia (see indo-aryan superstrate in mitanni) most closely related to indo-aryan. it is attested in documents from the ancient  mitanni kingdom and the hittites of anatolia.

