a honeymoon is the traditional trip taken by newlyweds to celebrate their marriage, and presumably, consummate it.  today, honeymoons are often celebrated in places that are secluded, exotic, warm, or otherwise considered special and romantic — for example, warm, sunny beaches, scenic coastlines, and mountain retreats.

the origin of the word honeymoon

the oxford english dictionary offers no etymology at all, but dates the word back to the 16th century:

the first month after marriage, when there is nothing but tenderness and pleasure" (samuel johnson); originally having no reference to the period of a month, but comparing the mutual affection of newly-married persons to the changing moon which is no sooner full than it begins to wane; now, usually, the holiday spent together by a newly-married couple, before settling down at home

one of the oldest citations in the oed indicates that, while today honeymoon has a positive meaning, the word  was actually a sardonic reference to the inevitable waning of love like a phase of the moon. this, the first literary reference to the honeymoon was penned in 1552, in richard huloet's abecedarium anglico latinum.  huleot writes:hony mone, a terme proverbially applied to such as be newe maried, whiche wyll not fall out at the fyrste, but thone loveth the other at the beginnynge excedyngly, the likelyhode of theyr exceadynge love appearing to aswage, ye which time the vulgar people cal the hony mone("honeymoon, a term proverbially applied to the newly-married, who will not fall out (quarrel) at first, but they love the other at the beginning exceedingly, the likelihood of their exceeding love appearing to assuage [any quarrels]; this time is commonly called the honeymoon").

it has also been said that the origins of this word date back to the times of babylon.  in order to increase the virility and fertility of the newlyweds, the father of the bride would provide his son in law with all the mead he could drink during the first month of the marriage (and therefore "moon").  mead is known to be a honey based drink. weddings once commonly took place upon the summer solstice and it was at this time of year that honey was first harvested.  thus the first month of marriage became known as a honeymoon. 
 