a honeymoon is the traditional holiday taken by newlyweds (or between two people in an early harmonious period in a relationship) to celebrate their marriage in intimacy and seclusion. today, honeymoons by westerners are sometimes celebrated somewhere exotic or otherwise considered special and romantic. 

history
possibly the earliest reference to a honeymoon is in deuteronomy 24:5 “when a man is newly wed, he need not go out on a military expedition, nor shall any public duty be imposed on him. he shall be exempt for one year for the sake of his family, to bring joy to the wife he has married.”

in western culture, the custom of a newlywed couple going on a holiday together originated in early 19th century great britain. upper-class couples would take a "bridal tour", sometimes accompanied by friends or family, to visit relatives that had not been able to attend the wedding. the practice soon spread to the european continent and was known as voyage à la façon anglaise (english-style voyage) in france from the 1820s on.

honeymoons in the modern sense (i.e. a pure holiday voyage undertaken by the married couple) became widespread during the belle époque,sylvain venayre. le temps du voyage noces. l’histoire no 321, juin 2007. issn 0182-2411 p. 57 as one of the first instances of modern mass tourism. this came about in spite of initial disapproval by contemporary medical opinion (which worried about women's frail health) and by savoir vivre guidebooks (which deplored the public attention drawn to what was assumed to be the wife's sexual initiation). the most popular honeymoon destinations at the time were the french riviera and italy, particularly its seaside resorts and romantic cities such as rome, verona or venice. typically honeymoons would start on the night they were married.

etymology

the oxford english dictionary offers no etymology, but gives examples dating back to the 16th century. the merriam-webster dictionary reports the etymology as from "the idea that the first month of marriage is the sweetest" (1546). 

the term honeymoon originates from the tradition that the in-laws of the couple were required to supply a month's worth of mead, or honey wine.

a honeymoon can also be the first moments a newly-wed couple spend together, or the first holiday they spend together to celebrate their marriage.

one of the more recent citations in the oxford english dictionary indicates that, while today honeymoon has a positive meaning, the word was originally a reference to the inevitable waning of love like a phase of the moon. this, the first known literary reference to the honeymoon, was penned in 1552, in richard huloet's abecedarium anglico latinum. huloet writes:

in many parts of europe it was traditional to supply a newly married couple with enough mead for a month, ensuring happiness and fertility. from this practice we get honeymoon or, as the french say, lune de miel, p.22, p.14

there are many calques of the word honeymoon from english into other languages. the welsh word for honeymoon is mis mêl (honey month). in hebrew it is yerach d'vash, or honeymonth. (interestingly, yerach is used for month, rather than the more common chodesh.  yerach is related to the word yare'ach for moon and the two words are spelled alike: ירח.) in arabic it is shahr el 'assal, meaning 'honey month'. the spanish word for honeymoon is la luna de miel (the moon of honey), the italian luna di miele (same translation), and the greek μήνας του μέλιτος (same translation). the persian word for it is mah e asal which has both the translations honeymoon and honey month (mah in persian meaning both moon and month). the same goes for the word ay in the turkish equivalent, balayı.

