'use --~~~~ to sign.'

question to hokanomono
i see you have reverted my recent change, however to my best knowlage what i've changed was correct. are you certian that the previous version is the correct one? i know for a fact seppuku does not mean to cut one's stomach, harakiri is the word. i do not belive it was wise to change it back.

as far as i know, i didn't change it back. all i did was adding the kanji again. please check the current version and tell me what's wrong, or just correct it. --hokanomono 07:34, 2004 jun 28 (utc)

which article should be the main one, and which the redirect? i prefer seppuku as the main article, with hara-kiri redirecting to it. ed poor

"hara-kiri" is what it is most widely known as in english, so that's where the article should be. --zundark, 2002 jan 11

there should be two entries, one for hara-kiri and one for seppuku. the former describes the usage of a word, the latter a form of honourable suicide. it is not as if both mean exactly the same (assuming the description is correct).--branko

the english dictionaries i've looked at just define "seppuku" as "hara-kiri". english usage is not the same as japanese. --zundark, 2002 jan 11

 i'm not in favour of perpetuating errors. the term hara-kiri came into common knowledge during wwii, along with a number of other derogatory terms. common use, for me, only prevavils in chosing among a number of correct options. article under seppuku, with redirect at hara-kiri. noel 15:15, 21 jan 2004 (utc)

we don't list the unification church as the "moonies", just because it's the best known, right? if correctness or npov isn't an issue, then common usage should prevail, but i think npov and correctness should come first. --dmerrill

but the idea that "seppuku" is more correct than "hara-kiri" in english is itself non-npov. english dictionaries note that the word "moonies" is colloquial (and often derogatory), but they don't do so for "hara-kiri" (at least, not the ones i've looked at). --zundark, 2002 jan 11

this is an encyclopedia, though, and so we should have article under the more "scholarly" word.  students looking up "hara-kiri" for use in a homework assignment will probably benefit more by having the article under "seppuku".  i don't know how that works, it just makes sense to me. it is the more honorable word, anyway.-- dreamyshade

i voice agreement with dreamyshade.  this should be under seppuku and hara-kiri should redirect there.  since both are borrowed words and both should be borrowed correctly since this is a npov 'pedia.  the article that has the redirect should be the colloquial, not the correct form.  therefore, i shall move the article *back* to seppuku and make hara-kiri the redirect.  emperorbma

p.s. wikipedia exists to spread facts, not perpetuate a mistake of borrowing from another language.  since both terms are now (interchangably) used in english, the article which houses the information should be the correct term as it was in the original language, not the incorrectly borrowed slang.  potentially insulting the japanese user base by calling it by hara-kiri is not advisable in this forum. emperorbma 07:57 16 jul 2003 (utc)

should the article mention that hara-kiri and seppuku are "spelled" the same in japanese, just with the kanji in the opposite order? i think that's a kinda `fun fact`... well, as fun as suicide gets. --
carl

i don't know about "fun", but it's worth mentioning - or should i say, pointing out, since the kanji for both words is in the article already. (although the kanji for "hara-kiri" appears to have an extra 'syllable'.) —paul a 01:14, 22 jan 2004 (utc)

i have doubts about the following paragraph: 

"to distinguish the decapitation from a common execution, a trusted and skilled samurai was chosen to strike the blow, from behind, leaving the head attached to the body by a flap of skin at the front of the neck." 

can anyone confirm or deny? exploding boy 13:43, jan 27, 2004 (utc)

 yes, i think i see what you mean... maybe one could be a little less explicit. probably the main point here is not to separate head and body entirely, which could be enough of a description. --markus krötzsch 22:07, 14 jun 2004 (utc)

it's not the explicitness that bothers me, it's whether or not it's actually true.  exploding boy 04:13, jun 15, 2004 (utc)

 

the photo is interesting, but where is it from? (i know it's scanned from a book, but is it kabuki?) exploding boy 10:20, mar 28, 2004 (utc)

anyone?  anyone?  exploding boy 04:13, jun 15, 2004 (utc)