merge from jigai post afd
following wikipedia:articles for deletion/jigai afd the article jigai, last state was merged to seppuku. :00:15, 28 february 2013‎ cnilep reducing (-5,341)‎ to (+3,229)‎ bytes. the terminology section below was shortened and placed earlier in the article.
terminology
the word  means "suicide" in japanese. the usual modern word for suicide is .じがい 1 0 【自害】 - goo 辞書 related words include ,  and . in some popular western texts, such as martial arts magazines, the term is associated with suicide of samurai wives.black belt magazine dec 1980 - page 47 "the samurai men were probably most famous for their ritual seppuku suicides (disembowelment), more commonly known as hara-kiri (literally, "belly slitting"). samurai women had their own form of ritualistic suicide, called jigai. this type of " the term was introduced into english by lafcadio hearn in his japan an attempt at interpretation (1923).lafcadio hearn japan: an attempt at interpretation 1923 reprint 2005 page 318 "among samurai women — taught to consider their husbands as their lords, in the feudal meaning of the term — it was held a moral obligation to perform jigai by way of .." an understanding which has since been translated into japanese and hearn seen through japanese eyes (tsukishima, 1984).築島謙三 tsukishima kenzo translator and editor ラフカディオ・ハーンの日本観: その正しい理解への試み (lafcadio hearn's japan: an attempt at interpretation) 1984 page 48 "いろいろその機能に変化が生じてきたけれども、この切腹、自害は上代日本の宗教的の証拠と考えるとすれば、それは大きな誤まりであって、むしろこのような行為は由来宗教的な性格をもこのような自己犠牲をテ—マにした悲劇を日本の国民はいまなお愛好し ..." joshua s. mostow (2006) notes that hearn misunderstood the term jigai to be the female equivalent of seppuku.joshua s. mostow iron butterfly cio-cio-san and japanese imperialism - essay in a vision of the orient: texts, intertexts, and contexts of madame butterfly editor j. l. wisenthal 2006 - page 190 "lafcadio hearn, in his japan: an interpretation of 1904, wrote of 'the religion of loyalty': in the early ages it appears to have been ... jigai [lit., 'self-harm,' but taken by hearn to mean the female equivalent of seppuku], byway of protest against ..." mostow's context is analysis of puccini's madame butterfly (1904) and the original cio-cio san story by john luther long. though both long's story and puccini's opera predate hearn's use of the term jigai, the term has been used in relation to western japonisme (van rij 2001).jan van rij madame butterfly: japonisme, puccini, & the search for the real cho-cho-san.  2001 page 71 "of the samurai class could not be sold by their family but they could sell themselves; and finally the act of jigai, suicide by a dagger or short sword piercing the neck, was reserved for women of the samurai class to which, in long's story, ..."

in ictu oculi (talk) 03:03, 1 march 2013 (utc)

 