hydrocodone chemical structure
hydrocodone 4,5a-epoxy-3-methoxy-17-methylmorphinan-6-one tartrate (1:1) hydrate (2:5) (source: rxlist.com)'' cas number  125-29-1 atc code    r05da03 chemical formula c18h21no3 molecular weight 299.368 bioavailability ? metabolism hepatic elimination half-life 4-8 hours excretion renal pregnancy category  category c (usa) legal status schedule ii/iii; hydrocodone products containing less than 15mg per dosage unit are schedule iii drugs. pure hydrocodone, and those containing more than 15mg per dosage unit are considered schedule ii drugs. (source: dea.gov) routes of administration oral
hydrocodone or dihydrocodeinone (marketed as vicodin, anexsia, dicodid, hycodan, hycomine, lorcet, lortab, norco, tussionex) is an opioid derived from either of the naturally occurring opiates - codeine or thebaine. hydrocodone is an orally active narcotic analgesic and antitussive that is marketed in multi-ingredient schedule iii products. the typical therapeutic dose of 5 mg to 10 mg is pharmacologically equivalent to 200 to 400 mg of oral codeine. sales and production of this drug have increased significantly in recent years, as have diversion and illicit use. 
hydrocodone is commonly available in tablet, capsule, and syrup form. (source: opiate equivalancy taken from tarascon pocket pharmacopoeia)

as a narcotic, hydrocodone relieves pain by binding to opioid  receptors in the brain and spinal cord.  it may be taken with or without food, but should never be combined with alcohol.  it may interact with monoamine oxidase inhibitors, as well as other drugs that cause drowsiness.  it is in  fda pregnancy category c:  its effect on an unborn embryo or fetus is not clearly known and pregnant women should consult their physicians before taking it.  common side effects include dizziness, lightheadedness, nausea,  drowsiness,  vomiting, and constipation.  some less common side effects are  allergic reaction, blood disorders, changes in mood, mental fogginess, anxiety, lethargy, difficulty  urinating, spasm of the ureter, irregular or depressed respiration, and rash.

hydrocodone can be habit-forming, and can lead to physical and psychological addiction.  in the u.s., pure hydrocodone and forms containing more than 15mg per dosage unit are considered schedule ii drugs.  those containing less than 15mg per dosage unit are schedule iii drugs. hydrocodone is typically found in combination with other drugs such as paracetamol (acetaminophen), aspirin and homatropine methylbromide.  in the uk it is listed as a class a drug under the misuse of drugs act 1971.

the presence of acetaminophen in hydrocodone-containing products deters many drug users from taking excessive amounts. however, some users will get around this by extracting a portion of the acetaminophen using hot/cold water, taking advantage of the water-soluble element of the drug. it is not uncommon for addicts to have liver problems from taking excessive amounts of acetaminophen over a long period of time--taking 10-15 grams of acetaminophen in a period of 24 hours typically results in severe hepatotoxicity. it is this factor that leads many addicts to use only pure forms of opiates such as oxycontin.

symptoms of hydrocodone overdosage include respiratory depression, extreme somnolence, coma, stupor, cold/clammy skin, sometimes bradycardia, and hypotension. a severe overdose may involve circulatory collapse, cardiac arrest and/or death.

