the primary sector of industry generally helps to involv the conversion of natural resources into primary products. most products from this sector are considered raw materials for other industries. major businesses in this sector include agriculture, agribusiness, fishing, forestry and all mining and quarrying industries. 

the manufacturing industries that aggregate, pack, package, purify or process the raw materials close to the primary producers are normally considered part of this sector, especially if the raw material is unsuitable for sale or difficult to transport long distances.about.com: sectors of the economy

primary industry is found in larger amounts in developing countries; for instance, animal husbandry is more common in africa than in japan. development - sectors of the economy primary sector in economic development 

mining was a common and widespread industry in south wales and a good case study of how an economy can come to rely on one form of business.mining: it's only a word 

however in developed countries primary industry becomes more developed and more high-tech, for instance the mechanization of arable farming opposed to hand picking and planting. in america in the corn belt combine harvesters pick the corn, spray systems distribute large amounts of pesticides, herbicides and fungicides thus proving that the more developed an economy is, the higher the capital that is invested into expansion is. 
these technological advances and investment allow the primary sector to require less workforce and, this way, developed countries tend to have a smaller percentage of their workforce involved in primary activities, instead having a higher pecentage involved in the secondary and tertiary sectors. h dwight h. perkins: proceedings of the academy of political science, vol. 31, no. 1, china's developmental experience (mar., 1973)

also, developed countries are allowed to mantain and develop their primary industries even further due to the excess wealth. for instance, eu subsidies in europe provide buffers for the fluctuating inflation rates and prices of agricultural produce. this allows developed countries to be able to export their agricultural products at extraordinarily low prices, making them extremely competitive against those of poor or underdeveloped countries that maintain free market policies and low or unexistant tariffs to counter them. wto ministerial outcome imbalanced against developing countriesthird world farmers hit by unfair rulesu.s. subsidies help big business, but crush farmers from developing countries

