a hamster is kind of rodent. there are many distinct hamster species, most of which are distinguished by their expandable cheek pouches, which reach from their cheeks to their shoulders. 

 hamsters commonly kept as pets or used in lab research 

syrian hamster (golden hamster) - mesocricetus auratus
some breeds of syrians are known as a teddy bear hamsters, standard hamsters, fancy hamsters, or black bear hamsters.
all syrian hamsters were originally from syria. they may now be extinct in nature, but are popular as house pets all across the world. adults grow to about 6" to 7" in length, and in captivity will usually live from 2 to 3 years.
dwarf campbells russian hamster - phodopus campbelli
sometimes known as a dzungarian (djungarina) hamster.
dwarf winter white russian hamster - phodopus sungorus
this species is also known as the siberian hamster; it is also sometimes called a dzungarian (djungarian) hamster.

 hamsters rarely kept as pets 

chinese hamster - cricetulus griseus
due to their small size, these are commonly, but inaccurately referred to as a type of dwarf hamster. this is incorrect. they are not closely related to the dwarf hamster species, and are actually known as "rat-like" hamsters.
roborovski hamster - phodopus roborovskii

 hamsters not kept as pets, but which exist in the wild 

european field hamster - cricetus cricetus
also called the common field hamster and the black bellied hamster. they are indigenous to europe. they are endangered in nature, and are not kept as pets.
rumanian hamster - mesocricetus newtoni
also called the romanian hamster
turkish hamster - mesocricetus brandti
also called the brandts' hamster
ciscaucasian hamster - mesocricetus raddei
also called the georgian hamster
ladak hamster - cricetulus alticola
chinese striped hamster - cricetulus barabensis
mongolian hamster - cricetulus curtatus
eversmann's hamster - cricetulus eversmanni
tibetan hamster - ???
lesser longtailed hamster - cricetulus longicaudatus
armenian hamster - cricetulus migratorius
also called the migratory grey hamster
greater longtailed hamster - cricetulus triton
also called the korean hamster
cricetulus obscurus (is there a common name for this hamster?)
'cricetulus pseudogriseus (is there a common name for this hamster?)
mouse-like hamster - calomyscus bailwardi
sub-species of the mouse-like hamster include: c. bailwardi  baluchi, c. bailwardi mystax, c. bailwardi urartensis

 animals that are not really hamsters 

note that there are some rodents sometimes called "hamsters" that are not part of the hamster family. these rodents include

 south african hamster (mystromys albicaudatus), which is really the white tailed mouse
 maned hamster, or crested hamster, which is really the maned rat (although not nearly as marketable under that name.)

links

about hamsters on petwebsite.com

hamsteriffic.com

california hamster association

american hamster association

hamsters galore! community website

alt.pets.hamsters usenet newsgroup faq

speedy (a syrian hamster)

hamster dancehamster''' is a computer jargon term referring to a cordless computer mouse that uses radio or infrared technology.
the name derives from the fact that hamsters are similar to mice but lack tails.

/talk