eo:hamstro
<table border="1" cellspacing="0" align="right" cellpadding="2">
scientific classification
<td>
kingdom:animalia
phylum:chordata
class:mammalia
order:rodentia
family:cricetidae</td></table>
a hamster is a kind of rodent. there are many distinct hamster species, most of which are distinguished by their expandable cheek pouches, which reach from their cheeks to their shoulders. 

most hamsters in american and english pet stores are syrian (aka golden) hamsters. even the teddy bear hamsters and the so-called "black bear" hamsters that are so popular now are all recently bred syrian hamster variations. all of them may well indeed be the descendants of a single mother.

hamsters have been used in lab research on leprosy. 

 discovery of the syrian hamster 
in 1839 british zoologist george waterhouse reportedly found an elderly female hamster in syria, naming it cricetus auratus, the golden hamster. the hamster's fur was on display at the british museum.  the syrian hamster was then ignored by european science for the next century. around 1930, zoologist and professor at the university of jerusalem aharoni found a mother and litter of hamsters in the syrian desert. by the time he got back to his lab, most had died or escaped. the remaining hamsters were given to the hebrew university in jerusalem, where they were successfully bred. they were a bit bigger than the ones waterhouse found, so they were named mesocricetus auratus, although they were probably the same species. mesocricetus auratus is the name that syrian hamsters go by today.

descendants of these hamsters were shipped to scientific labs around the world, for use as research animals. they arrived in the united kingdom in 1931, and in 1938 reached the united states. just about all golden hamsters are descended from the original litter found in syria, except for a few that were brought into the united states by travellers who found them in the desert. a separate stock of hamsters was imported into the us in 1971, but it isn't known if any of today's north american pets are descended from them. 

today there are two other popular varieties of hamsters sold in pet stores: the dwarf campbells russian and the winter white russian hamsters. further, there are two other breeds (chinese and the roborovski hamster) that on occasion can be found.  

 hamsters commonly kept as pets or used in lab research 

syrian hamster (golden hamster) - mesocricetus auratus
some breeds of syrians are known as teddy bear hamsters, standard hamsters, fancy hamsters, or black bear hamsters.
all syrian hamsters were originally from syria. they may now be extinct in nature, but are popular as house pets all across the world. adults grow to about 6" to 7" in length, and in captivity will usually live from 2 to 3 years.
dwarf campbells russian hamster - phodopus campbelli
sometimes known as a dzungarian (djungarian) hamster.
dwarf winter white russian hamster - phodopus sungorus
also known as the siberian hamster, and sometimes called the dzungarian (djungarian) hamster.

owners of pet hamsters can find help and support at this website:
the alt.pets.hamsters newsgroup faq

 hamsters rarely kept as pets 

chinese hamster - cricetulus griseus
due to their small size, these are commonly, but inaccurately referred to as a type of dwarf hamster. they are actually part of the family termed "rat-like" hamsters.
roborovski hamster - phodopus roborovskii

 hamsters not kept as pets, but which exist in the wild 

european field hamster - cricetus cricetus
also called the common field hamster and the black bellied hamster. they are indigenous to europe. they are endangered in nature, and are not kept as pets.
rumanian hamster - mesocricetus newtoni
also called the romanian hamster
turkish hamster - mesocricetus brandti
also called the brandts' hamster
ciscaucasian hamster - mesocricetus raddei
also called the georgian hamster
ladak hamster - cricetulus alticola
chinese striped hamster - cricetulus barabensis
mongolian hamster - cricetulus curtatus
eversmann's hamster - cricetulus eversmanni
tibetan hamster - ???
lesser longtailed hamster - cricetulus longicaudatus
armenian hamster - cricetulus migratorius
also called the migratory grey hamster
greater longtailed hamster - cricetulus triton
also called the korean hamster
cricetulus obscurus (is there a common name for this hamster?)
cricetulus pseudogriseus (is there a common name for this hamster?)
mouse-like hamster - calomyscus bailwardi
sub-species of the mouse-like hamster include: c. bailwardi  baluchi, c. bailwardi mystax, c. bailwardi urartensis

 animals that are not really hamsters 

note that there are some rodents sometimes called "hamsters" that are not part of the hamster family. these rodents include

south african hamster (mystromys albicaudatus), which is really the white tailed mouse
maned hamster, or crested hamster, which is really the maned rat (although not nearly as marketable under that name.)

links
about hamsters on petwebsite.com

genome information

hamsteriffic.com

california hamster association

american hamster association

hamsters galore! community website

owners of pet hamsters can find help and support at this website: the alt.pets.hamsters newsgroup faq

speedy (a syrian hamster)

hampsterdance2

hampsterdeath, part of freepuzzlearena

hamster is a computer jargon term referring to a cordless computer mouse that uses radio or infrared technology. the name derives from the fact that hamsters are similar to mice but lack tails.