hamsters
image:hamster.jpg
syrian hamster
scientific classification
kingdom:animalia
phylum:chordata
subphylum:vertebrata
class:mammalia
order:rodentia
suborder:sciurognathi
 superfamily:myomorpha
family:cricetidae
subfamily:cricetinae
genera
cricetusmesocricetusphodopuscalomyscus
cricetulusmystromys
a hamster is a rodent belonging to subfamily cricetinae. the subfamily contains about 18 species, classified in six or seven genera.  most have expandable cheek pouches, which reach from their cheeks to their shoulders. 

species of hamsters
the best known species is the syrian hamster, also known as the golden hamster, mesocricetus auratus, which is commonly kept as a pet.  two other varieties of hamster are also growing in popularity as pets, the dwarf campbell's russian and the winter white russian hamsters (both subspecies of phodopus sungorus).  two further species (the chinese hamster cricetulus curtatus and the roborovski hamster phodopus roborovskii) can be found on occasion.

hamsters as pets
hamsters are nocturnal by nature, making them less than ideal as pets for people who are normally awake during the day. however, many people prefer them to rats, given rats' unsavory reputation (undeserved as pets).  unlike rats, they are not particuarly good at learning tricks but can be entertaining to watch.  they are also much smaller than guinea pigs, although equally as furry and appealing, so are more appropriate for homes with limited space.

gnawing
despite their cuddly appearance, hamsters have long, thin, sharp teeth than can pierce a finger that is mistaken for a carrot or for a predator.  when they are accustomed to being handled and are not startled, however, they are not inclined to bite and can be placed in the custody of responsible school-age children. like many rodents, their teeth grow continuously and they must have appropriate things to chew on to relieve their instinctive gnawing and to help keep the teeth at a healthy length.  they will gnaw on whatever is available, so they must be kept in enclosures that they cannot chew through. when the hamster is kept in or near a bedroom, their nocturnal nature combined with their gnawing  habit can become  distracting.

exercise and entertainment
like all pets, hamsters need exercise and entertainment to maintain their physical and mental health.  an exercise wheel allows hamsters to run full speed to their hearts' content, but is not as mentally stimulating as more elaborate enclosures consisting of interconnecting transparent tubes and chambers that somewhat mimic the burrows that they might have in the wild and allow their owners to enjoy their activities.

hamsters are nest builders and a steady supply of fresh strips of tissue or newspaper (with soy-based ink) allows them to build a secure and comfortable spot in a corner of their enclosure.

they are also fairly neat in their bathroom habits; if their enclosure is regularly cleaned, they choose one small location in which to urinate and defecate, making the cleaning simple.

if they are handled frequently, hamsters enjoy being out of their enclosures and having the opportunity to explore.  however, they must be kept away from holes in the wall or in large pieces of furniture, because they will seek out the dark and burrow-like confines of those areas and can be difficult to convince to come out again.

food
pet stores can provide basic food for hamsters that provides their nutritional needs, but they also enjoy fresh vegetables and bird seed.  they must also always have fresh water available.

reproduction and longevity
hamsters typically live no more than two to four years in captivity, less than that in the wild. because of their short life expectancy, hamsters mature quickly and can begin reproducing at a young age (3 months?). left to their own devices, hamsters will produce several litters a year with several babies in each litter.  male and female hamsters are therefore usually kept in separate enclosures to prevent the addition of unwanted offspring.

when seen from above, a  sexually mature female hamster has a trim tail line; a male's tail line bulges on both sides.

classification of hamsters
taxonomists currently disagree about the most appropriate placement of the subfamily cricetinae.  some place it in a family cricetidae that also includes voles, lemmings and some other genera; others group all these into the larger family muridae. 

the following list of species may not be complete.
 genus mesocricetus 
syrian hamster (golden hamster) - mesocricetus auratus
turkish hamster mesocricetus brandti. also called the brandts' hamster, azerbajaini hamster 
georgian hamster mesocricetus raddei (also: ciscaucasian hamster)
romanian hamster mesocricetus newtoni

 genus phodopus 
djungarian hamster phodopus sungorus; two subspecies are recognised, the siberian hamster proper or white russian hamster, phodopus sungorus sungorus, and campbell's dwarf russian hamster phodopus sungorus campbelli
mongolian hamster phodopus roborovskii, more commonly known as the roborovskii hamster.  these tiny hamsters are now becoming popular as pets.

 genus calomyscus 
mouselike hamster calomyscus bailwardi.  sub-species include: c. bailwardi  baluchi, c. bailwardi mystax, c. bailwardi urartensis

 genus cricetus 
 european hamster cricetus cricetus (also called the common hamster or black-bellied field hamster)

 genus cricetulus 
mongolian hamster cricetulus baranensis (also: chinese striped hamster)
mongolian hamster cricetulus curtatus
long-tailed hamster cricetulus longicaudatus 
tibetan hamster cricetulus kamensis 
kazakh hamster cricetulus eversmani (also: eversmann's hamster)
chinese hamster cricetulus curtatus. these are now becoming popular as pets; because of their small size, they are inaccurately referred to as "dwarf" hamsters. 
ratlike hamster cricetulus triton. also: greater longtailed hamster, and the korean hamster.
ladak hamster cricetulus alticola
armenian hamster cricetulus migratorius. also called the migratory grey hamster
gobi hamster cricetulus obscurus
 transbaikal hamster - cricetulus pseudogriseus

 genus mystromys 
 south african hamster mystromys albicaudatus 

 animals that are not really hamsters 
note that there are some rodents sometimes called "hamsters" that are not currently classified in the hamster subfamily cricetinae. these include
 maned hamster, or crested hamster, which is really the maned rat lophiomys imhausi (although not nearly as marketable under that name.)

