er..."deific archetype"? "naturalistic religions? i'm puzzled...

 sorry about that - terms from a long-ago mythology class, from which basis i wrote that. i'll try to clarify and neutralize it.
-- april

any idea when or where the christian description of satan having cloven hoofs and horns began? i haven't a clue. wesley 19:49 sep 19, 2002 (utc)

satan isn't wholly evil in the judaic tradition.  the book of job describes satan as a rival to yhwh, but not necessarily a malicious entity. user:waxmop

this is all a modern garble, so that a subtle reference to syncretism is only fair to the reader. fortunately the revised entry satan answers some puzzles. but this kind of sentence:
during the rise of christianity, literature attributed the image of the horned god in the form of satan... to hear tell, christianity just rose like sourdough, while i was sitting in the parlor reading my favorite author, literature, who attributes images in the form ... wetman 08:00, 7 jul 2004 (utc)

"such widely-dispersed and historically unconnected mythologies as the celtic cernunnos, the welsh caerwiden, the english herne the hunter"

i appreciate the sceptical tone, but there's a lot of controversy about that. it's certainly not an undisputed fact.

i would agree that "unconnected" is probably controversial. some pre-socratic greek thought, pythagoras in partciular, appears to have had subcontinental influences, and i understood that it was fairly well assumed now that some form of contact or transmission of ideas took place. there is no need to assume that gauls and other celts were uninfluenced by eastern traditions, even though they may not have recognised them as such, and vice versa.

 horns and antlers 

minor point:

the horned god image as embraced by neo-pagan traditions includes both gods with horns (such as pan) and gods with antlers (such as cernunnos). i think the distinction between the two, and the way they have been "combined" should be made more clear.
yes, it would be a valuable addition (do you have sources where this is discussed?) beyond the obvious that just, well, antlers are a type of horns. dab 09:07, 17 nov 2004 (utc)

 god or god 

see user_talk:sam_spade#horned_god. the article diety might also add some insight.  14:05, 29 dec 2004 (utc)

yeah, so it's a syncretic term. it's still "horned god" is a syncretic term, not, "horned god" is a syncretic term. you should add that the insight from deity is your insight. this is not a matter of capitalization as explained on god. it's simply a question of common usage. see http://www.google.com/search?q=%22horned+god%22 . please move it back, you did no good here. dab <small>(ᛏ</small>) 15:01, 29 dec 2004 (utc)

"horned god" is used almost exclusively to refer to this figure.  as a proper name, it should be capitalized.  also, it's a bit telling of the bias involved in the rewrite that the first three words are now the horned god (sic) rather than the horned god or the horned god.  -sean curtin 01:29, dec 30, 2004 (utc)

i know. please change it back. dab <small>(ᛏ</small>) 11:49, 30 dec 2004 (utc)

i agree that because it's a proper name it should be "horned god".  note the capitalizations of "great mother", "great father", and "green man".  the capitalizations should at least be consistent.  the rest of the page currently has "horned god" though instead of "horned god".  the capitalization should at least be consistent in the same article!  --chan-ho suh 01:35, jan 3, 2005 (utc)
well, you can fix it, if you like... dab <small>(ᛏ</small>) 08:28, 3 jan 2005 (utc)

i agree with chan-ho suh. im going ahead and changing the instences of "horned god" to "horned god".
craptree 05:35, 10 jan 2005 (utc)

i respect the concensus.  01:29, 12 jan 2005 (utc)