 how come there is no mention of the ancient middle east? 

horns were a sign of divinity in the ancient middle east. this can be seen by almost all the gods of ancient ugarit being depicted as having horns. considering ugarit directly influenced judaism which then directly influenced christianity and thus the most common satan depiction in modern times, this seems to be a vital fact not to be mentioned.24.190.34.219 (talk) 22:33, 27 may 2009 (utc)

 this article is specifically regarding the wiccan deity. if you have sources that cite the wiccan horned god being influenced by the ancient middle east, that content would be very welcome here. the general article that discusses all the different horned gods is horned deities. i think the middle east gods influencing some depictions of satan would belong there. --davémon (talk) 16:21, 9 june 2009 (utc)

 dispute use of baphomet illustration 

the choice for using the illustration of baphomet is an extremely poor choice for the subject matter, especially as wiccans feel the need to seperated their religion from anything percieved as "satanic".

images of the greek god pan, the bull-horned greek god dionysus, the celtic cernunnos, herne the hunter, horned puck, horned neolithic deities, or even images of horned satyrs would more closely represent the horned god as worshipped by wiccans.

i move to remove the illustration of baphomet.boyinthemachine (talk) 02:56, 28 august 2009 (utc)

 agree that its misleading to put any pre-wiccan image as the primary image on the page. perhaps move baphomet down to the "historical origins" section where it mentions levi, and get an actual wiccan originated hg image for the intro. davémon (talk) 22:01, 28 august 2009 (utc)

baphomet really has nothing to do with wicca or the horned god.  the horned god of wicca more closely related to pan, a nature god. levi's depiction of baphomet is based upon judeo-christian iconography, whereas the horned god is based upon gallic, greek, and norse tradition. the prominent picture of baphomet, put on this page to smear wicca as a devil worshipping religion ought to be removed. in fact, i'm going to remove it now. --wingedearth (talk) 19:12, 13 december 2009 (utc)

 well, no. baphomet is seen by witchcraft scholars as a precurosr to the development of "the horned god" by murray, which was then co-opted by wicca. baphomet isn't related to devil worshipping at all. davémon (talk) 17:57, 29 april 2010 (utc)

 horned god not related to inanna's descent 

the reference to (sumerian) inanna's descent has been removed, because the myth has nothing to do with the horned god. the myth tells the story of inanna's descent into the underworld.  the underworld is not hell, though the removed text confuses the two. further, inanna descends to communicate with ereshkigal, the (female) queen of the underworld, and not any horned god.  —preceding unsigned comment added by wingedearth (talk • contribs) 20:47, 25 december 2009 (utc) 

 cult of ammon / alexander the great 

i've removed these two sections, as they both cover gods with horns, but aren't specifically related to the development of the "horned god" this article is about. of course, if there is scholarship that does show that the cult of ammon or the horned depictions of alexander the great influenced murray or gardners development of their concept then these topics should come back into the article. --davémon (talk) 16:26, 27 may 2011 (utc)

i believe that amun (ammon) and alexander the great came before murray and gardner. people worshipped a "horned god" thousands of years before witchcraft or wicca. --camocon (talk) 17:26, 27 may 2011 (utc)

careful please everyone, this looks like edit-warring with a lot of reversions and not much talking. please discuss any further content disputes here rather than just adding/subtracting text. there's no urgency about this. my two penn'orth: there have been a lot of very valuable additions lately to this article but it is, as the lede suggests, an article about the wiccan god and not all horned gods in general. so maybe some of the detail has strayed a little too far from the main topic? do we in fact need a fork to the wider concept of horned gods in general? kim dent-brown (talk) 17:44, 27 may 2011 (utc)

there are many, many gods in many different cultures and times that have horns, but they're not all related to each other, even if some came first and others later. i agree there is a lot of good stuff, but it just doesn't belong in this article (which is about the wiccan god). i suggest that the amun and the alexander the great articles are the right place for the detailed material.  there is also the article horned deity where much of this material would also be very useful. davémon (talk) 20:34, 27 may 2011 (utc)

 fantasy and science fiction 

the beginning of this article appears to contradict itself a bit. it says:
this article is about the wiccan deity. for gods with horns or antlers on their heads, see horned deity.
the horned god is one of the two primary deities found in some neopagan religions. (it does then go on to discuss wicca but the lead finishes with "the horned god has been explored within several psychological theories, and has become a recurrent theme in fantasy literature.") 
if the first statement is the intention of the article, i wonder if the "fantasy and science fiction" actually belongs in the horned deity article as it is not specifically (or at all) wiccan. if the second statement is in fact what was intended, then the first statement needs rephrasing. i don't know the answer so i haven't edited anything. suetwo (talk) 19:23, 6 june 2012 (utc)
i share your uncertainty about this sue - i always shudder a bit when i see a new addition to an 'in popular culture' section. i certainly don't think this section belongs here as it's not, as you point out, about the wiccan deity. whether it has any place at horned deity or not is another matter; my personal taste says not, but i don't have that article on my watchlist and no very strong views about it. if we don't get anyone else chiming in here, i suggest either of us should move it in a day or so. kim dent-brown (talk) 20:01, 6 june 2012 (utc)
 several fantasy authors have been inspired by wicca. marion zimmer bradley, for example was a wiccan, and founder member of the darkmoon circle (a feminist wiccan coven). please check the citations before deciding whether something is relevant or not. i'm confident most of the cites expressly mention wiccan deity as either an influence or a parallel. this isn't so much an "in popular culture section", as an influence of a religion on literature, and literatures influence on the development of a religion, as cited in reliable sources. such sections do tend to attract uncited and quite spurious comparisons, and those should definitely be removed. --davémon (talk) 14:58, 8 june 2012 (utc)
i'm absolutely with you on mzb, who cites wicca as an influence in her preface to mists of avalon. but that's only three lines of the existing section. none of the rest is relevant to the wiccan deity - although i accept that there's a place elsewhere in wikipedia for reference to the piper at the gates of dawn chapter from wind in the willows. kim dent-brown (talk) 15:06, 8 june 2012 (utc)
hi davémon. maybe it's just the way the section is written but i'm distracted by remarks including:
an unnamed, generic horned deity 
the collective subconscious image of the horned aliens
mankind's image of the devil or satan
a "race-memory" of psychic martian grasshoppers
are you in a position to express in the article your confidence that most of the cites expressly mention wiccan deity, or is that an unfair request? i grumble to myself about editors who try to create work for others to do and now i'm doing it myself. at least i managed to format these indented bullets :) suetwo (talk) 23:38, 12 june 2012 (utc)
 well, as i'm suggesting we retain this material, it is kind of is my job to prove it is legitimate! from memory i think huttons argument is that the wiccan horded god concept grew out of a cultural milieu that had turned pan into a generic 'horned god' and that kenneth graeme's 'piper at the gates of dawn' was an example of that, so i would say its inclusion is relevant here, although possibly not in the form it currently takes. it is hard to come to editorial consensus unless all the editors invovled are looking at the sources, so i do encourage you to check for yourself. i can't recall the detail of the quatermass and the pit article, and will have to go and look it up, but it does seem a bit of a stretch really. davémon (talk) 15:27, 14 june 2012 (utc)