idaho is a state located in the northwestern united states. its capital is boise and the u.s. postal abbreviation is id.

the uss idaho was named in honor of this state.

name

idaho is perhaps the only state to be named as the result of a hoax. when a name was being selected for new territory, eccentric lobbyist george m. willing suggested "idaho," an indian term he claimed meant "gem of the mountains." it was later revealed willing had made up the name himself, and the original idaho territory was re-named colorado because of it. eventually the controversy was forgotten, and modern-day idaho was given the made-up name when the idaho territory was formally created in 1863.

 history 

the lewis and clark expedition entered present-day idaho on august 12, 1805, at the lemhi pass. at that time, approximately 8,000 native americans lived in the region.

idaho was subsequently part of oregon territory and later washington territory, fur trading and missionary work attracting the first settlers to the region. while thousands passed through idaho during the california gold rush of 1849, few people settled there. the first organized town in idaho was franklin, settled in 1860 by mormon pioneers.  when organized as a territory in 1863, idaho's total population was under 17,000.

on march 4, 1863, president abraham lincoln signed an act creating idaho territory.  the political stability of the territorial period encouraged settlement. almost immediately, a public school system was created, stage coach lines were established and a newspaper, the idaho statesman, began publication. in 1865, boise replaced lewiston as capital. the 1861 discovery of gold in idaho and the completion of the transcontinental railway in 1869 brought many new people to the territory, including chinese laborers who came to work the mines. when president benjamin harrison signed the law admitting idaho as a u.s. state on july 3, 1890, the population was 88,548. an interesting fact is that idaho almost never became a state - in 1887, president grover cleveland refused to sign a bill that would have combined southern idaho with nevada and northern idaho with the washington territory.  sectionalism in early idaho was abated by moving the university of idaho from its planned location in eagle rock (near idaho falls) to moscow in northern idaho.  idaho still operates under its original (1889) state constitution.

as idaho approached statehood, mining and other extractive industries became increasingly important to her economy. by the 1890s, for example, idaho exported more lead than any other state. although idaho's dependence on mining has decreased, the state remains a top producer of silver and lead. today, idaho's industrial economy is growing, as plants are built to process the state's rich agricultural and natural resources.  since in the late 1970s boise has emerged as a center of semiconductor manufacturing.

a troubling recent development in idaho has been the location therein of many right-wing extremist political groups, most notably those holding neo-nazi views, such as the aryan nation.  these groups are most heavily  concentrated in the northern part of the state, particularly in the vicinity of coeur d'alene.  their existence has become so proverbial in american popular culture that an unfortunate joke asks what idaho is most famous for, and the answer is: "potatoes and nazis."

 law and government 

the current constitution of idaho provides for 3 branches of government, the executive, legislative and judicial branches. the legislative body consists of the senate and the house.

the governor of idaho is dirk kempthorne (republican).  
united states senators: larry e. craig (republican) and mike crapo (republican).  
house of representatives: c.l. "butch" otter (republican, district 1) and mike simpson (republican, district 2)

see: list of idaho governors

 geography 

left|thumb|map of idaho

thumb|reynolds creek experimental watershed in the owyhee mountains about 50 miles southwest of boise, idaho.
see: list of idaho counties

idaho borders washington, oregon, nevada, utah, montana, wyoming and the canadian province of british columbia (the idaho-bc border which is 48 miles long). idaho has a rugged landscape with some of the largest unspoiled natural areas in the country. idaho is a rocky mountains state with exciting scenery and enormous natural resources. idaho has towering, snow-capped mountain ranges, swirling white rapids, peaceful lakes and steep canyons. the churning waters of snake river rush through hells canyon, which is deeper than the grand canyon. shoshone falls plunges down rugged cliffs from a height greater than that of niagara falls.

the major rivers in idaho are the snake river, the clearwater river and the salmon river.  other significant rivers include the boise river and the payette river.

idaho's highest point is borah peak in the lost river mountains north of mackay.  idaho's lowest point is in lewiston, where the clearwater river joins the snake river and continues into washington.

 lakes 
 
 coeur d'alene
 payette lake (mccall)
 pend oreille
  
 sawtooth national recreational area
 redfish lake
 alturas lake
 petit lake
 sawtooth lake
 

 parks 
 
 balanced rock
 city of rocks
 craters of the moon national monument
 farragut state park
  
 harriman state park
 hells canyon
 massacre rocks
 yellowstone national park
 

 economy 
the state's gross product for 1999 was $34 billion placing it 44th among the states. the per capita income for 2000 was $24,180. 

idaho is an important agricultural state, producing nearly one third of the potatoes grown in the united states.  other important agricultral products are beans, lentils, sugar beets, cattle, dairy products, wheat, and barley. 

important industries in idaho are food processing, lumber and wood products, machinery, chemical products, paper products, electronics manufacturing, silver and other mining, and tourism.  the idaho national engineering and environmental laboratory (ineel), a government lab for nuclear energy research, is also an important part of the eastern idaho economy.

 demographics 
as of 2003, the population of idaho was 1,366,332.

racially, the state is:
88% white
7.9 hispanic
1.4% american indian
0.9% asian
0.4% black
2% mixed race

the five largest ancestries in the state are: german (18.9%), english (18.1%), irish (10%), american (8.4%), norwegian (3.6%).

religion
idaho is a unique state religiously; it is the only state with large percenatages of both protestants (39%) and mormons (30%), and as with many western states, there is also a large number of non-religious people (when compared to the nation as a whole).

the religious affiliations of the people of idaho are:
protestant – 39%
mormon - 30%
roman catholic – 12%
other christian – 2%
other religions – 1%
non-religious – 13%

the three largest protestant denominations in idaho are: methodist (6% of total state population), lutheran (4%), baptist (4%).

 important cities and towns 
 
population > 100,000 (urbanized area)
 boise city 
(state capital)
  
population > 10,000 (urbanized area)
 blackfoot
 burley
 coeur d'alene
 idaho falls
 lewiston
 meridian
 moscow
 mountain home
 nampa
 pocatello
 rexburg
 twin falls
  
smaller towns and cities
 sun valley - major year-round resort with world-class skiing 
 island park - snowmobiling, summer recreation
 driggs - skiing (grand targhee)
 st. anthony - sand dunes
 kuna
 

 education 
 colleges and universities 
 
albertson college of idaho
boise state university
brigham young university-idaho
idaho state university
  
lewis-clark state college
new saint andrews college
northwest nazarene college
university of idaho
 

 professional sports teams 
the minor league baseball teams are:
boise hawks
idaho falls chukars

other minor league sports teams:
idaho stampede
idaho steelheads

 miscellaneous information 

 major highways 
 
interstate 15
interstate 84
interstate 86
interstate 90
interstate 184
  
u.s. highway 2
u.s. highway 12
u.s. highway 20
u.s. highway 26
u.s. highway 30
u.s. highway 89
u.s. highway 91
u.s. highway 93
u.s. highway 95
 

 