here is an edited version that 213.122.165.xxx reduced the original article to:

home schooling (teaching children at home) also known as home eduation or elective home based learning.

the advantages usually cited by proponents include: individual attention, customized curricula, efficient use of children's time, a safer environment, freedom from harmful peers, religious instruction, privacy, parental control, and improved socialization to adult society among others.  

in the u.s. in 1999, homeschoolers scored about 23% higher than publicly-schooled children on refereed nationally-normed tests.  most employers find home-schooled persons work with less need for supervision.  in 2001, public school grades are deprecated by many college-entrance procedures, and a ged taken at less than 18 years of age, combined with good scores on the sat and act permit entrance to most colleges and apprenticeships.  the individualized instruction and customized curriculi may compensate for other disadvantages.

in the uk around 1% of school aged children are home educated. there are no controls on what is taught or how it is taught. nor is there any right for the state to test a child. though if a local authority requests it the parents should indicate in what way they are providing an education suitable to the child. de registration is by right not permission (except in scotalnd and northern ireland)

home educators address the socialasation issues through local community organisations and their own dedicated home education support structures.

most homeschooling families make substantial economic sacrifices to educate their children at home.  because one parent refrains from working in order to give instruction often a second income is lost though if there are preschool children, homeschooling can be a better economic use of a parents' time than combining low-paying work with child-care and poor public schooling.

education can proceed flexibly, at students' own paces, year-around, even with frequent traveling. vacations and other family activities all become part of the families educational life. education occures every waking hour.

for links to other organisations look at www.home-education.org.uk where you will find links to uk, us european and australian home edcuation organisations.

213.122.165.xxx , you probably don't realize that it is considered extremely impolite on wikipedia to delete large amounts of content without explanation on the /talk page.  we really need to make this policy clearer in a few different places. --lms