 homeschooling should be differentiated from what homeschooling is not 

i think the definition of homeschooling should be differentiated from what homeschooling is not; being self taught and on the job training. or at least some mention of the fact that there are educated people who did not attend formal school and who were not educated by their parents.. so in the list of notable homeschooled people it should have less about their achievements and more on what their actual educational experiences were. one modern legal definition is “a school primarily conducted by parents or legal guardians for their own children.” the new definition for a home school is “a school provided by a parent or legal guardian for his or her own child.” this might mean that some individuals like booker t washington were self taught, with little or no intervention from their parents.

 improvement of sources needed. 

i am looking through the sources of some of the sections in this article, and i thought i should write down the result of this while i remember it.

history
the first part of this section which outline the birth of western public education has some sources that don't exactly come from the highest authorities on the history of education. reference 3 is from the von mises institute, which seems to be a political organisation and think tank. reference 5 and 6 are from an homeschooling organisation. referce 7 is not working, but the article can be found searching the sutherland institute website, where the link currently takes you. the article was published in a student edited journal from bringham young university law school. 

research
the first reference, 22, is to a list of studies on a homeschooling advocacy organisation. most of the studies listed are from their own organisation or otherwise not from peer reviewed journals, but a few are. i haven't looked in to what they say in any detail, but if they support the claim that is referenced, they could be referenced directly instead. reference 23 is to a self-published book by the same organisation (but that is stated in the text). the 26th reference is from the same source. reference 30 is from another homeschooling site (and doesn't direct to the article intended any more).

concluding, there is room for improvement, providing neutral references to this article. i probably won't do it myself, but hopefully someone else will. the encyclopædia britannica has an article about homeschooling. maybe this could be used as a neutral source for the wikipedia article.

pastisch (talk) 01:23, 9 february 2013 (utc)
 the ludwig von mises institute is not a political organization. it is a non-profit with an education mission, specifically in the fields advanced by its namesake: economics and history. some of their work is for a more popular audience, and some is peer-reviewed, scholarly research. also, they have a large library of books that they make available free online, so they are a great resource for finding sources with relaxed copyrights. i haven't clicked through on the references yet to see where this one fits. sixteenkats (talk) 19:49, 12 august 2016 (utc)
just checked "reference 3" (now reference 9). it is a link to the free full text of a full-length book written by an economist (specifically, he had a phd in economics and was a professor) that was published by the mises institute and then, as per their education mission, they made available online. the book appears to have copious footnotes and 