 

this is a horrible title, but i am having trouble thinking of a better one -- imperial elector?  electors of the holy roman empire?  an adjectival/genetive reference would be better than everything in the nominative...jhk
i like 'electors of the hre'

at the risk of being crude, that sounds like the name of a playboy pictorial....
mmmmmm, show me your wittelsbachs, bay-beee...

to m. tinkler and jhk
please check out kurfuersten/electors . 
also let me know about the german ( or english) names on the hohenzollern list ??
thanks  user:h.j.

"...shortly before the empire was abolished by napoleon i..."

i understood that it was abolished in order to prevent the possibility of its being taken over and used by napoleon to support his legitimacy, i.e. as a consequence of him but not by him. what is the actual siuation? pml.

i also like "elector of the holy roman empire" better than this title.  as for the abolition, what happened was that napoleon created the confederation of the rhine.  the states that joined it (including bavaria, wurttemberg, and baden), seceded from the holy roman empire, and the emperor eventually decided to give up the ghost, and declared the empire at an end. i'm going to edit a bit. john 02:30 apr 30, 2003 (utc)

what about the adjectival holy roman imperial elector? -- lord emsworth 02:47, dec 20, 2003 (utc)

encyclopedia britannica (online ed.) has, "...beginning around 1273 and with the confirmation of the golden bull of 1356, there were seven electors..."; what happened circa 1273? — matt 09:39, 5 jul 2004 (utc)
britannica, then, contradicts my main source for the original composition of the collegiate: lord bryce's holy roman empire. lord bryce suggests that pope urban iv wrote a letter mentioning seven electoral princes, but urban died in 1264—before the year mentioned in britannica. -- emsworth 14:40, jul 5, 2004 (utc)

 maybe one for meta:making fun of britannica? rudolf i of the house of habsburg was elected in 1273, maybe that's what britannica was referring to. — matt 14:53, 5 jul 2004 (utc)

electoral prince
is it appropriate to give "electoral prince" as an equivalent to "prince-elector"?  my understanding was that the former term was generally used for heirs to prince-electors, and not for prince-electors themselves. john k 06:48, 22 dec 2004 (utc)

regarding the abolition of the hre. i think it is accurate to say that it was napoleon himself who abolished it, rather than the habsburg emperor. napoleon was at the time the undisputed master of europe, and the abolition was imposed on the habsburgs as a virtual decree from bonbaparte. while franz ii, as the last title holder, executed the formalities of the abolition, the act itself can be unambiguously attributed to napoleon. i shall stop short of reverting the edit of stanzegel, however, to preserve the distinction of that formality. thank you stanzegel for that edit, in fact. --a. s. a. 06:29, dec 28, 2004 (utc)