habakkuk or havakuk (חֲבַקּוּק, standard hebrew ḥavaqqūq, tiberian hebrew ḥăḇaqqûq) was a prophet in the bible old testament and jewish tanakh. the name is possibly related to an akkadian word for a plant or the hebrew word meaning "embrace." he was the eighth of the twelve minor prophets, and likely the author of the book of habakkuk, which bears his name.

practically nothing is known about habakkuk's personal history, and all that we surmise is inferred from the text of his book, which consists of five oracles about the chaldeans (assyrians) and a song of praise to god. since the chaldean rise to power is dated c. 612 b.c., we can assume that he was active about that time, making him an early contemporary of jeremiah and zephaniah. jewish sources, however, do not group him with those two prophets, who are often placed together, so it is possible that he was slightly earlier than them. 

habakkuk is unique among the prophets in that he openly questions the wisdom of god. in in the first part of the first chapter, the prophet sees the injustice among his people and asks why god does not take action. "1:2 yahweh, how long will i cry, and you will not hear? i cry out to you “violence!” and will you not save?" - world english bible. 

in the middle part of chapter 1, god explains that he will send the chaldeans to punish his people. 1:5 “look among the nations, watch, and wonder marvelously; for i am working a work in your days, which you will not believe though it is told you. 1:6 for, behold, i raise up the chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, that march through the breadth of the earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs. (world english bible)

in the final part of the first chapter, the prophet expresses shock at god's choice of instrument for judgement. 1:13 you who have purer eyes than to see evil, and who cannot look on perversity, why do you tolerate those who deal treacherously, and keep silent when the wicked swallows up the man who is more righteous than he, (world english bible) 

in chapter 2, he awaits god's response to his challenge. god explains that he will also judge the chaldeans, and much more harshly. 2:8 because you have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples will plunder you, because of men’s blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell in it. 2:9 woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, (world english bible)

finally, in chapter 3, habakkuk expresses his ultimate faith in god, even if he doesn't fully understand. 
3:17 for though the fig tree doesn’t flourish, nor fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive fails, the fields yield no food; the flocks are cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stalls: 3:18 yet i will rejoice in yahweh. i will be joyful in the god of my salvation! (world english bible) 

because of the final chapter of his book, which is a poetic praise of god, it has been assumed that habakkuk was likely a member of the levitical choir in the temple. contemporary scholars point out, however, that this chapter is missing from the dead sea scrolls and has some similarities with texts found in the book of daniel. they therefore suggest that it is a later interpolation which influenced the authors of daniel, and that it is impossible to make the assumption of habakkuk's background based on it.

there is a mausoleum in the city of tuyserkan in west of iran which is believed to be the mausoleum of habakkuk the prophet.

