150pix|thumb|right|a "squeeze toy" replica of the holy hand grenade of antioch

the holy hand grenade of antioch is a fictional weapon from the comedy film monty python and the holy grail. it bears a striking resemblance to the sovereign's orb of the united kingdom, and seems to draw some inspiration from holy spear of antioch. although a minor gag in the film, the holy hand grenade (as it is more popularly known) has gone on to be one of the most frequently referred to elements of monty python humour, notably in computer and rpg games, and also with tv and other movie references.

description

the holy hand grenade of antioch is a visual satire of a type of royal regalia known as a globus cruciger, specifically the sovereign's orb of the united kingdom.  the sovereign's orb similarly has a band of jewels running along the center, and a half-band on the top hemisphere, with a cruciform at the crest.  

the center sphere of the holy hand grenade appears to be made out of a coconut (another recurring gag in the film).

the fictional holy hand grenade of antioch is a reference to the "actual" holy spear of antioch. the supposed holy spear was unearthed from the floor of a church during the siege of antioch (1098) by crusaders on the first crusade, found by a poor and otherwise unknown monk named peter bartholomew. its "discovery", during the darkest hours of the siege when all hope seemed lost, quickly became a source of contention between the pious crusaders who believed peter, and the more pragmatic who didn't; yet in the end its "discovery" was credited by the crusaders in inspiring them to overcome seemingly impossible odds in breaking through the siege to continue on their quest to jerusalem. 

usage instructions

the holy hand grenade of antioch was a "sacred relic" carried by franciscan monk brother maynard and is used near the film's conclusion to destroy a killer rabbit (they have already survived having the trojan rabbit fall back on them) that blocks the path of king arthur and his hapless knights errant.  although unusually ornate in design, the holy hand grenade functions like any other hand grenade. 

particularly important is the counting to three after the pulling of the triggering pin (the surmounted cross), complicated by king arthur's mental block on counting. the instructions for its use are in the fictitious book of armaments (chapter 2, verses 9-21), parodying the king james bible:

arthur then holds up the holy hand grenade of antioch and cries out "one! two! five!", to which sir galahad says "three sir!" arthur then yells "three!" and hurls it at the killer rabbit.  the grenade soars through the air, accompanied by a short bit of choral music, then bounces once and explodes.  presumably the killer rabbit is dead after this, for the knights subsequently enter the cave which it has been guarding.

cultural 