the book of hosea is a book of the jewish hebrew bible, known to christians as the old testament, written by hosea. this book stands first in order among the "minor prophets."  

the unique contribution of hosea is the extended allegory of marriage given in chapters 1-3.  while a few commentators believe this section to be entirely symbolic, most believe that the events described did occur.  

first, hosea was directed by yahweh to marry a harlot, and he did so.  this was a symbolic act, representing yahweh's covenant with israel.  what was the nation of israel when yahweh chose to enter into a covenant relationship with it?  it was a group of ex-slaves who chose to worship a golden calf rather than yahweh, the god who had rescued them from slavery.  thus, yahweh characterizes the nation as a harlot.

second, hosea and his wife, gomer, have a son.  yahweh commands that the son be named jezreel.  this name refers to a valley in which much blood had been shed in israel's history, especially by the kings of the northern kingdom.  the naming of this son was to stand as a prophecy against the reigning house of the northern kingdom, that they would pay for that bloodshed.

third, the couple has a daughter.  yahweh commands that she be named no pity or not pitied, to show israel that, although yahweh will still have pity on the southern kingdom, he will no longer have pity on the northern kingdom; its destruction is imminent.

fourth, a son is born to gomer.  it is questionable whether this child was hosea's, for yahweh commands that his name be not my people, or more simply, not mine.  the child bore this name of shame to show that the northern kingdom would also be shamed, for its people would no longer be known as god's people.

following this, the prophecy is made that someday this will all be changed, that yahweh will indeed have pity on his people, israel.

chapter two describes a divorce.  this divorce seems to be the end of the covenant between yahweh and the northern kingdom.  however, it is probable that this was again a symbolic act, in which hosea divorced gomer for infidelity, and used the occasion to preach the message of yahweh's rejection of the northern kingdom.  he ends this prophecy with the declaration that yahweh will one day renew the covenant, and will take his people back in love.

in chapter three, at yahweh's command, hosea seeks out gomer once more.  either she has sold herself into slavery for debt, or she is with a lover who demands money in order to give her up, because hosea has to buy her back.  he takes her home, but refrains from sexual intimacy with her for many days, to symbolize the fact that israel will be without a king for many years, but that yahweh will take israel back, even at a cost to himself.

chapters 4-14 spell out the allegory at length.  chapters 4-10 contain a series of oracles, or prophetic sermons, showing exactly why yahweh is rejecting the northern kingdom, what are the grounds for the divorce.  chapter 11 is yahweh's lament over the necessity of giving up the northern kingdom, which is a large part of the people of israel, whom he loves.  he promises that he will not entirely give them up.  then, in chapter 12, he pleads for their repentance.  chapter 13 foretells the destruction of the kingdom at the hands of assyria, because there has been no repentance.  chapter 14 urges them to seek forgiveness, and promises the restoration of israel, while urging the utmost fidelity to yahweh.

context
hosea prophesied in a difficult period of israel's history, the period of the northern kingdom's decline and fall in the 8th century bce. hosea was himself a native of the northern kingdom, and wrote in a distinctive northern dialect. 

during hosea's lifetime, the kings of the northern kingdom, their aristocratic supporters, and the priests had led the people in falling away from the law of god, as given in the pentateuch.  forsaking the worship of yahweh, they worshipped other gods, especially baal, the canaanite fertility god.  other sins followed, including homicide, perjury, theft, and sexual sin.  hosea, like other 8th century prophets, declares that, unless they repent of these sins, yahweh will allow their nation to be destroyed, and the people will be taken into captivity by assyria, the greatest nation of the time.

in fact, assyria did capture samaria, the capital of the northern kingdom, in 722 bce.  all the members of the upper classes and many of the ordinary people were taken captive and carried off to live as prisoners of war.

themes
the primary theme of the book of hosea is that god loves israel, just as a man loves his wife.  this is shown by the extended metaphor of hosea's own marriage.

in conjunction with that theme, however, are the twin themes of israel's sin and the coming retribution.  although yahweh loves israel, israel has not returned his love.  this has been shown by the continued idolatry and acts of violence, oppression, and sexual sin among the people.  because israel has not returned god's love, he will put them away from him, just as hosea did his wife, and send them into exile.

this introduces the fourth theme, which is the restoration of israel from exile.  the country will be conquered; the people will be sent into exile; but some will return and build the land up once more.  god will embrace them as his people, and they will be loyal to him as their god.

he:הושע הנביא
jv:hosea
de:hosea