moved section on casablanca to that page.

lots of well-written, informative material here, but veers towards hagiography.  it needs revising with  the neutral point of view in mind, specifically the section about artistic figures. --robert merkel

is all of this work original?  it sounds maybe coprighted?  if not, i apologize.  -- zoe

i'd like to know, too.  parts of it sound overly laudatory, and i've been dipping in occasionally to try to tone it down.

one thing to check is a google exact string search--e.g. just search for "[one striking sentence from the article]".  i did that earlier with no results, but may have picked the wrong sentences.  also, there was that fracas over the poet, where someone took an article from wikipedia, reposted it, and accuse us of a violation.  but, anyway, it's a place to start.  --kq 14:30 aug 6, 2002 (pdt)
the author has posted to my talk page asserting that it's original.  --kq 05:16 dec 5, 2002 (utc)
---
could somebody please add some kind of organization to this sprawling article? thanks.

well, when someone interested in seeing some organization comes along, it will be organized. hey, you're interested in seeing some organization... ;-) --stephen gilbert 15:19 oct 1, 2002 (utc)

i looked into this article while writing about bogart for the polish wikipedia.
boy, the birth date is wrong ! by making a cursory web research i have found out that the correct
birth date is december 25 and the january 23 date is an example of urban legend.kpjas wed, 18 dec 2002 22:06:20 +0100

some of the anecdotes in the story are very interesting and do indeed serve to keep the reader captivated, but i think it makes the article a little too lengthy. i'm very ambivalent about this. what's the perfect length and comprehensiveness of an article? kent wang 12:18, 15 jan 2004 (utc)

his early life
a minor nit here, but when discussing his mother the article mentions: "in her prime, she made over $50,000 a year as an illustrator, then a vast sum for a woman to earn." is that an inflation-adjusted figure? if not, and maud humphrey really did pull down $50k at the beginning of the 20th century, that is a vast sum of money period. 

 captions                                                      right|thumb|love for the same woman complicated the relationship between rick and victor laslo (henreid) in "casablanca".
i couldn't figure out why to include a second casablanca picture in the article and struggled with writing a good caption for it.  feel free to put it back if you can make it fit without being redundant and with a good caption.  caption guidance is at wikipedia:captions. -- ke4roh 01:47, aug 22, 2004 (utc)
the caption is more about the film than the actor; should perhaps be on the film's page, but no reason for it here. misfittoys 00:30, aug 23, 2004 (utc)

 request for references 

hi, i am working to encourage implementation of the goals of the wikipedia:verifiability policy. part of that is to make sure articles cite their sources. this is particularly important for featured articles, since they are a prominent part of wikipedia. the fact and reference check project has more information. thank you, and please leave me a message when you have added a few 