very nicely written, but "subverting feudal legislation" has to go -- it doesn't really make sense.  if there was such a thing (whole different topic -- i don't think it's a valid expression), then baronial courts would have epitomized it, i'd have thought.  the barons were just abusing the hell out of their power, which had incresed dramatically as a result of the war between stephen and matilda. jhk

the point is that feudal legislation was the legislation of the time, ad hoc and rough justice that it was; i agree that the phrase is somewhat oxymoronic but what was going on here was a major shift in power between state (in the form of the king) and the barony, and this is characterised in reversal by the radical reforms which henry ii introduced. this is a watershed phase in english history. the barons weren't just abusing their power, they were refocussing power to their own ends, a quiet revolution. henry wasn't going to have that... but if you feel you have to rephrase it, please do. i couldn't think of a better way of explaining a fairly complex phenomenon without the aforementioned oxymoron... sjc

the point i'm trying to make is that i don't think there is such a thing as "feudal" legislation.  there's just whatever existed at the time.  feudal implies something having to do with personal allegiance and oaths, but some of the people who benefited from henry's changes wouldn't have had much to do with that.  plus, i'm pretty sure that, if you look at english vs. french vs. imperial legislative and judicial systems (which many people would call feudal), you'd find that they were all dramatically different.  <sigh> i'll sleep on it and see what i can come up with ... <the carolingianist sighed again, wishing the middle ages weren't such a pain in the arse>.  it's times like these that i just want to do bios on the arsenal back four jhk

the arsenal back four are certainly less complicated: but some of eeyore's tackles are positively mediaeval in their lateness... :-) sjc
hey <she said, chuckling mightily> -- eeyore is one of my heroes!  anyway, it looks like mr campbell is getting set to inherit the nickname... and a certain other person who wears bright red boots seems to be making up for age and lack of speed with a chelsea-like aggressiveness...jhk

is it "who will rid me of this turbulent priest" or "troublesome priest"? i thought the latter, but bouncing both of google (a legitimate form of historical research, as i'm sure you all know) produces more of the former. only by a margin of about 2:1, though. come to think, it's rather remarkable that henry ii spoke modern english.

so what did he say? -- paul drye

probably neither since henry ii's first language was french... sjc

---

the article says that henry had his son henry the young king be crowned king in 1170, yet it also states that he continued to reign himself until 1189. so what is going on? were they co-kings, did they govern different areas, or what?

they were sort of co-kings.  it was an attempt to make sure that henry's heir would suceed him, something he had no guarantee of when he was young.  rickk 01:56, 21 dec 2003 (utc)

who were the five sons of henry and eleanor?  i can only find four: henry, richard, geoffrey, and john.  daughters were matilda and eleanor.  rickk 01:56, 21 dec 2003 (utc)