+india thumb|250px|center|map of india continent  asia geographic coordinates   area - total  - % water ranked 7th3,287,590 km²  0.096 % (314,400 km²) coastline   7,000 km highest point  kanchenjunga, 8598 m lowest point  indian ocean, 0 m longest river  ganges-brahmaputra largest inland body of water  chilika lake land use - arable land - permanent   crops - other 54.4 %2.74 %42.86 % (2001) climate:  varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in north natural resources  coal (fourth-largest reserves in the world), iron ore, manganese, mica, bauxite, titanium ore, chromite, natural gas, diamonds, petroleum, limestone, arable land environmental issues   deforestation, soil erosion, overgrazing, desertification

the geography of india presents a varied and diverse landscape ranging from snow-clad mountain ranges, deserts to plains, hills and plateaus. climate ranges from equatorial in the far south, to tundra in the himalayan altitudes. india has a long coastline of over seven thousand kilometres, most of which lies on a peninsula that protrudes into the indian ocean. india is bounded in the west by the arabian sea, and in the east by the bay of bengal.

india's main geographical features are the fertile indo-gangetic plain, which occupies most of northern, central and eastern india, and the deccan plateau of southern india. to the west of the country is the thar desert, which consists of a mixed rocky and sandy desert. india's east and north-eastern border consists of the lofty himalayan range. the highest point in india is the kanchenjunga, which is at a height of 8,598 m (28,208 feet).

india is bordered by pakistan, the people's republic of china, bangladesh, myanmar, nepal, bhutan and afghanistan1. sri lanka, the maldives and indonesia are the neighbouring island nations lying to the south of india. politically, india is divided into twenty-eight states, six federally administered union territories and a national capital territory.

geographical regions
there are five main geographical regions in india:
 himalayan range
 indo-gangetic plains
 thar desert
 deccan plateau
 western and eastern ghats
 coastal plains

himalaya

the himalaya mountains lie in the north of the country. they extend from the state of jammu and kashmir in the west to arunachal pradesh in the east, passing through himachal pradesh, uttaranchal, and sikkim. in the east, the states of nagaland, manipur and mizoram feature hilly terrain resulting from the same tectonic processes that created the himalayas.

the climate in this region ranges from temperate to alpine with increasing altitude.

indo-gangetic plains

the indo-gangetic plains are large flood plains of the indus and the ganges-brahmaputra river systems. they run parallel to the himalaya mountains, to their west and south, from jammu and kashmir in the west to assam in the east, passing through punjab, haryana, eastern rajasthan, uttar pradesh, bihar, jharkhand and west bengal. this is the most fertile and heavily populated region of the country.

this region usually has hot summers and cool winters.

thar desert

the thar desert is situated in rajasthan. this region is arid. 

deccan plateau

the deccan plateau is a large triangular plateau that occupies most of peninsular india. the plateau slopes gently from west to east. it gives rise to several peninsular rivers such as the godavari, the krishna, the cauvery and the narmada.

this region is mostly semi-arid due to not receiving the full impact of the monsoons. it has hot summers and mild winters.

western and eastern ghats
main articles: western and eastern ghats

the western and eastern ghats form the boundaries of the deccan plateau, seperating it from the coastal plains. while the western ghats are higher of the two and mostly continous, the eastern ghats are discontinous and eroded by several rivers and their tributaries. the western ghats are more suitable for hydro power plants. these ranges exhibit a variety of flora and fauna and contain rain forests. only a few regions however remain untouched by human exploitation.

the western ghats are more humid than the eastern ghats.
coastal plains

the region between the deccan plateau and the sea is occupied by a very flat coastal plain. this plain is narrower in the west than in the east. especially on the east coast, the plains are extensively used for agriculture, especially rice cultivation. many large river deltas aid in this activity, with good alluvial soil.

the western costal plains can be divided into malabar coast in the south and the konkan in the north.

the coastal plains are hot and humid throughout the year, with the western plains getting four months of rainfall from the monsoons.

features

mountain ranges and peaks

 himalayan range
 patkai range
 vindhya-satpura range (western ghats)
 aravalli-sahyadri range (eastern ghats)

plains
deserts

 thar desert

plateaus
wetlands

india is a party to the wetlands convention and has nineteen ramsar sites distributed mostly in punjab. assam, orissa, kerala, rajasthan and jammu and kashmir. most adjoin lakes and wildlife sanctuaries.

 ashtamudi wetland (kerala)
 bhitarkanika mangroves (orissa)
 bhoj wetland (madhya pradesh)
 chilika lake (orissa)
 deepor beel (assam)
 east calcutta wetlands (west bengal)
 harike lake (punjab)
 kanjli (punjab)
 keoladeo national park (rajasthan)
 kolleru lake (andhra pradesh)
 loktak lake (manipur)
 point calimere wildlife and bird sanctuary (tamil nadu)
 pong dam lake (himachal pradesh) 
 ropar (punjab)
 sambhar lake (rajasthan)
 sasthamkotta lake (kerala)
 tsomoriri (jammu and kashmir)
 vembanad-kol wetland (kerala)
 wular lake (jammu and kashmir)

islands

 island chains
 andaman and nicobar islands
 daman and diu
 lakshadweep

 prominent islands
 majuli
 sriharikota
 srirangapatna

rivers and lakes

major rivers (rivers and their major tributaries):
 brahmaputra
 cauvery
 ganga
 yamuna
 alaknanda
 godavari
 indus
 chenab
 ravi
 sutlej
 jhelum
 beas
 krishna
 narmada

major lakes
 chilika lake (orissa)

peninsulas and straits
straits
palk straits

deltas
sunderbans (brahmaputra and ganga river systems)

elevation extremes

lowest point:  indian ocean 0 m
highest point: kanchenjunga 8,598 m (k2 8,611 m lies in the disputed territories).

geology
climate
political geography

natural resources
india is particularly rich in a variety of natural resources, along with 56% arable land, it has significant sources of coal (fourth-largest reserves in the world), iron ore, manganese, mica, bauxite, titanium ore, chromite, natural gas, diamonds, petroleum, limestone, thorium (world's largest along kerala's shores).

land use:
arable land: 56%
permanent crops: 1%
permanent pastures: 4%
forests and woodland: 23%
other: 16% (1993 est.)

irrigated land: 480,000 km² (1993 est.)

natural hazards
india is particular dependent on the monsoons and thus has seasonal, periodic droughts, which have resulted in famines. rivers originating in the himalayas particularly brahmaputra are a cause of flash floods in the north east. the coastal regions of andhra pradesh, orissa, west bengal, tamil nadu on the west coast and kerala along the east coast suffer from seasonal severe thunderstorms. earthquakes are most common in regions of maharastra, gujarat, andaman and nicobar islands and the north east along the himalayas.

environment - current issues

india has one of the largest populations of the world, most enviornmental problems are a result of over population and the resulting strain on limited resources. some of the major issues which need urgent attention are:

 deforestation
 soil erosion
 overgrazing
 desertification
 air pollution (industrial effluents and vehicular emissions).
 water pollution (raw sewage, runoff from use of agricultural pesticides)
 potable water

environment - international agreements
india is a party to several international agreements related to enviornment and climate, the most prominent among them are:

treaties and agreements specific regions and seasthe antartic treaty, law of the sea, ship pollution, whaling atmosphere and climateclimate change, kyoto protocol, ozone layer protection, nuclear test ban biodiversity, environment and forestsdesertification, endangered species, environmental modification, tropical timber 83 and tropical timber 94, wetlands wasteshazardous wastes    

