i don't really have any serious objection to the content of this page -- sometimes it is a bit vague, but in general pretty good.  but i do find it a little strange for two reasons: first, it reproduces a lot of material in other related articles, espeically marxism and karl marx.  if "historical materialism" is synonymous with "dialectical materialism" and "marxism" then i think there should be one page, and other pages should link to it.  if, on the other hand, "historical materialism" is more specific, the article needs to distinguish it from "dialectical materialism" and explain how it is one part but not the entirety of "marxism."  my second query follows from this -- assuming that "historical materialism" deserves its own article, i would expect a much lengthier explanation of marx's debt to/differences from hegel's historicism.  i am not qualified to contribute, as i have not read a lot of hegel directly.  (but i assume that an author of this article is someone who has read a lot of marx and hegel).  i would also expect more discussion of marx's historical works like the 18th brumaire or engels work on the peasant wars in germany.  i would expect a discussion of the relationship between marx's historicism (expresed in those books) and his ideas about progress or evolution, and his debt to morgan, sr

i agree with many of the sentiments above. there appears to be an attempt to sum up marxism, capital, value theory, uncle tom cobbley and all under this one topic. historical materialism is a methodological stance, not the actual workings-out of a given philosopher. there also appear to be controversial interpretations presented as fact: point 7 in the list is strictly speaking a theory due to lenin, only indirectly due to marx ... and the presentation of commodity fetishism (which is arguably out of place here) is one-sided. if no-one objects, i'll have a pop at rewriting this entry in a few weeks.
adhib

given that there were no objections, i have made the necessary (quite harsh) cuts, and added one quote which illustrates the meaning of this specific topic. 
adhib 19:31, 18 feb 2004 (utc)