i don't really have any serious objection to the content of this page -- sometimes it is a bit vague, but in general pretty good.  but i do find it a little strange for two reasons: first, it reproduces a lot of material in other related articles, espeically marxism and karl marx.  if "historical materialism" is synonymous with "dialectical materialism" and "marxism" then i think there should be one page, and other pages should link to it.  if, on the other hand, "historical materialism" is more specific, the article needs to distinguish it from "dialectical materialism" and explain how it is one part but not the entirety of "marxism."  my second query follows from this -- assuming that "historical materialism" deserves its own article, i would expect a much lengthier explanation of marx's debt to/differences from hegel's historicism.  i am not qualified to contribute, as i have not read a lot of hegel directly.  (but i assume that an author of this article is someone who has read a lot of marx and hegel).  i would also expect more discussion of marx's historical works like the 18th brumaire or engels work on the peasant wars in germany.  i would expect a discussion of the relationship between marx's historicism (expresed in those books) and his ideas about progress or evolution, and his debt to morgan, sr

i agree with many of the sentiments above. there appears to be an attempt to sum up marxism, capital, value theory, uncle tom cobbley and all under this one topic. historical materialism is a methodological stance, not the actual workings-out of a given philosopher. there also appear to be controversial interpretations presented as fact: point 7 in the list is strictly speaking a theory due to lenin, only indirectly due to marx ... and the presentation of commodity fetishism (which is arguably out of place here) is one-sided. if no-one objects, i'll have a pop at rewriting this entry in a few weeks.
adhib

given that there were no objections, i have made the necessary (quite harsh) cuts, and added one quote which illustrates the meaning of this specific topic. 
adhib 19:31, 18 feb 2004 (utc)

i have an objection! presenting the technological-determinist interpretation of marx's work as if it is the only one is fundamentally dishonest. there is a very long tradition of an anti-determinist reading that accords primacy to the *relations of production* rather than the forces of production. the article should, perhaps, reflect this?!

lorenzo

class struggle as the 'motor' of history

my understanding of the marxist approach to history is that class struggle is the motor that drives history and the result of this struggle is not predetermined. i will need to do more reading and thinking before contributing.....so little time!
john ball16.40 30/6/04

my understanding of dialectical materialism is that it is 'matter in self-motion' - godless change, the continual resolution of contradictions of being - that drives all historical phonemena, from quanta to galaxies.  within the current phase of human development the class struggle predominates human affairs.  capitalism constituted a phase of human cooperative development - mass production - but it has, like all things that overstay their welcome, turned into its opposite and has become a hindrance to social production.   contradictions arise naturally and are naturally resolved one way or another - life evolves.   the ruling class of capitalists shows no internal logic of preparing for its own demise and a move up to a higher social form - common ownership of the means of production - so it falls to the increasingly conscious proletariat to do it through a decisive social revolution.
danny

all possibly valuable insight, danny, but that would be better used at the entry for dialectical materialism, not historical materialism. adhib 22:32, 26 aug 2004 (utc)

okay.   a minefield of pedantry can easily arise here - the two terms are so easily interchangeable - especially when jumping through linked subjects.   i rarely post to anything, but if i do again i will try to keep more focused.   widipedists of the world, write!
danny. 01:50 1.10.2004 gmt
popper
i suggest to add a more detailed criticism of historical materialism, particularly that of popper. 

in addition, the lengthy quotes from marx and lenin are not very helpful -- makes the article feel like it was written in the soviet time where all you had to do was quote marx and lenin no matter what you wrote on...;) i suggest to tighten the text, and add popperian criticism, snice it is probably the most substantial of the basic ideas of marxism. what do you think? dietwald 17:51, 23 october 2005 (utc)

 defining historical materialism 

i have tried to sharpen the key sentence defining historical materialism at the start of this article. the original was a little to 'economic determinist' for my taste and would exclude much work which is, and has been, done in historical materialism.

--peterbowing 11:37, 23 march 2006 (utc)

i don't understand how this article can be considered complete without any reference to hegel. this article needs to take into account the inconsistency of the idealist conception (hegel's conception) of history, which is where marx first comes up with a materialist conception of history. without taking this into account, this article is incomplete. 

also, i agree with what what was said above about the quotes from marx and lenin. they're entirely unhelpful.

to be blunt, this article sucks. it hardly addresses the material outside of the introduction. this article needs to be cleaned up, possibly even rewritten entirely.