a hi-hat, or hihat, is a type of cymbal and stand used as a typical part of a drum kit by percussionists in disco, jazz, rock and roll, and other forms of contemporary popular music. 

operation
left|thumb|10" mini-hats with (1) hi-hat rod and clutch (2) tom and cowbell holder (3) hihat legs and pedal
the hi-hat consists of two crash cymbals that are mounted on a stand one on top of the other and clashed together using a pedal on the stand. a narrow metal shaft or "hi-hat rod" runs through both cymbals into a hollow tube and connects to the pedal. the top cymbal is connected to the rod with a "hi-hat clutch" while the bottom cymbal remains stationary resting on the hollow tube.

when the "footplate" of the pedal is pressed, the top cymbal crashes onto the bottom cymbal (closed hi-hat). when released, the top cymbal returns to its original position above the bottom cymbal (open hi-hat). a "tension unit" controls the amount of pressure required to lower the top cymbal, and how fast it returns to its open position."pearl drums hardware" 2004

 history of development 
right|thumb|hi-hat cymbals and stand
initial versions of the hi-hat were called "clangers" which were small cymbals mounted onto a bass drum rim and struck with an arm on the bass drum pedal. then came "snow shoes" which were two hinged boards with cymbals on the ends which were clashed together. next was the "low-boy" or "low-hat" similar to a modern hi-hat stand only with cymbals close to the ground. hi-hats that were raised and could be played by hand as well as foot may have been developed around 1926 by barney walberg of the drum accessory company walberg and auge.the drum book: the history of the rock drum kit (geoff nichols, 1997), p. 8-12

up until the late 1960s the standard hi-hats were 14", with 13" available as a less common alternative in professional cymbal ranges and smaller sizes down to 12" restricted to children's kits. in the early 1970s heavy rock drummers (including led zeppelin's john bonham) began to use 15" hi-hats. in the late 1980s zildjian released their revolutionary 10" special recording hats, which were small, heavy hi-hat cymbals intended for close miking either live or recording, and other manufacturers quickly followed. however paiste offered 8" mini hi-hats as part of their visions series in the early to mid 1990s, one of the world's smallest hi-hats. starting in the 1980s a number of manufacturers also experimented with rivets in the lower cymbal. but by the end of the 1990s the standard size was again 14", with 13" a less common alternative, and smaller hats mainly used for special sounds. rivets in hi-hats failed to catch on.

modern hi-hat cymbals are much heavier than modern crash cymbals, reflecting a continual trend to lighter and thinner crash cymbals as well as to heavier hi-hats. the other change has been that a pair hi-hat cymbals are no longer necessarily similar. more typically the bottom is now heavier than the top (but in some cases like the k zildjian steve gadd session hats the pattern is reversed for a cleaner chick and cleaner sticking), and may also be vented, this being one innovation to have caught on. some examples are sabian's fusion hats with holes in the bottom of the hi-hat or sabian, zildjian, and paiste's x-cellerator, master sound and soundedge respectively. some drummers even use completely mismatched hi-hats from different cymbal ranges (zildjian's k/z hats), of different manufacturers and even of different sizes (like again the k custom session hats where one hat is ¼ of an inch smaller than the other). 

other recent developments include the "x-hat" (fixed closed or 'half open' hi-hats) and cable-controlled or "remote" hi-hats. sabian released the "triple hi-hat" which is designed by peter kuppers. in this variation of the hi-hat, the top cymbal moves down and the bottom cymbal moves up simultaneously while the middle cymbal remains stationary.

drop-clutches are also used to lock and release hi-hats while both feet are in use playing double bass drums.

 playing techniques 

 audio samples component content audio  (ogg vorbis)hi-hatclosed hi-hat  open hi-hat hi-hat being opened and closed by its foot pedal   see the drums page at wikipedia commons for more 
when struck closed or played with the pedal, the hi-hat gives a short, muted percussive sound.  adjusting the gap between the cymbals can alter the sound of the open hi-hat from a "shimmering", sustained tone to something similar to a ride cymbal. when struck with a drumstick, the cymbals make either a short, snappy sound or a longer sustaining sandy sound depending on the position of the pedal. 

it can also be played just by lifting and lowering the foot to clash the cymbals together, a style commonly used to accent beats 2 and 4 in jazz music. in rock music, the hihats are commonly struck every beat or on beats 1 and 3, while the cymbals are held together. the drummer can control the sound by foot pressure. less pressure allows the cymbals to rub together more freely, giving both greater sustain and greater volume for accent or crescendo. in shuffle time, a rhythm known as "cooking" is often employed. to produce this the cymbals are struck twice in rapid succession, being held closed on the first stroke and allowed to open just before the second, then allowed to ring before being closed with a "chick" to complete the pattern (the cymbals may or not be struck on the "chick").  

a right-handed drummer will normally play the hi-hat pedal with his left foot, and may use one or both drumsticks. the traditional hi-hat rhythms of rock and jazz were produced by crossing the hands over, so the right stick would play the hi-hat while the left played the snare drum below it, but this is not universal. some top modern drummers like billy cobham, carter beauford and simon phillips do not cross their hands over at all, playing the hi-hat mounted on the left with the left stick rather than the right. this is called open handed playing.  in both rock and jazz, often the drummer will move the same stick pattern between the hi-hat cymbal and the ride cymbal, for example using the hi-hat in the verses and the ride in the chorus of a song, or using the ride to accompany a lead break or other instrumental solo.

roger taylor, drummer for the band queen, plays with many unique hi-hat techniques, including involuntary opening of the hi-hat on every backbeat for a rhythm emphasis and leaving the hi-hat slightly open when hitting the snare.

those playing double bass drums have also developed special techniques for using the hi-hat.

