"ich bin ein berliner" is a famous phrase by john f. kennedy. on june 26, 1963 in west berlin, he made a speech containing the sentences:

"two thousand years ago the proudest boast was civis romanus sum. today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is 'ich bin ein berliner.'
"all free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of berlin, and, therefore, as a free man, i take pride in the words 'ich bin ein berliner!'"

according to the context of the speech, kennedy meant that he stood together with west berlin in its rivalry with communist east berlin and the german democratic republic.

"jelly doughnut" urban legend

the jam-filled doughnuts known to americans and canadians as jelly doughnuts (called jam doughnuts elsewhere), are called berliners outside berlin (but usually referred to as pfannkuchen in berlin itself). as a result of kennedy's improper use of german grammar, his statement was amusingly analagous to ("i am a jelly doughnut", or "i am a jam doughnut"). normally a berliner would say "ich komme aus berlin" ("i come from berlin"), but because kennedy wanted to emphasize the common identity among people of the "world of freedom", that usage would have been misleading. "ich bin berliner" (cf. "ich bin amerikaner", "ich bin deutscher" etc.) would be preferred in common usage.

the use of the ein article changes the meaning of the sentence when referring to a profession or nationality. without ein a speaker is saying they are collectively part of a profession or nationality. with ein a speaker is saying they are an individual article or quantity.  

the urban legend aspect of the jelly doughnut statement apparently arose in florida in the 1980s and culminated in a letter to the editor to the new york times in 1987 which claimed that the error was embarrassing and resulted in laughter.  the context made the meaning very clear, though, so nobody misunderstood kennedy when he delivered his speech. he did however pronounce the sentence with a very strong massachusetts accent, reading from his note "ish bin ine bear-lean-ar". contrary to the urban legend, it was not followed by a roar of laughter. audio and film recordings show the remark was followed by applause and cheers, as was witnessed by television audiences in europe and the united states at the time.

 the phrase in fiction and popular culture
the british music group pop will eat itself varied the phrase to "ich bin ein ausländer" ("i am an outlander," or "i am from outside [of germany]") as the title and chorus of a 1994 song expressing solidarity with immigrants and condemning anti-immigrant hate speech as inevitably stoking violence, insisting that "freedom of expression doesn't make it alright."

the phrase is alluded to in an episode of the simpsons entitled "little girl in the big ten".  lisa simpson is reluctant to enroll in a gymnastics school in order to help her pass her physical education class at springfield elementary.  however, after having been inspired by president kennedy while knocked unconscious she awakes to claim "ich bin ein gymnast!". homer simpson then remarks that she must have dreamt about hitler again. also, in another episode of the series, abraham simpson has a flashback in which he hears john f. kennedy say the phrase "ich bin ein berliner", prompting abraham to yell "he's a nazi!" shortly before tackling kennedy. throughout the series, mayor "diamond joe" quimby, a blatant caricature of kennedy, uses variations of the phrase multiple times when addressing large crowds ("ich bin ein springfield swap meet patron!").

eddie izzard, an english comedian, talks about john kennedy's "i am a doughnut" speech in his stand-up act "dress to kill".

in terry pratchett's book monstrous regiment (p. 329 of the hardcover), samuel vimes makes a speech in which he says "ze chzy brogocia proztfik!", intending this to mean "i am a citizen of borogravia!". what he actually says is "i am a cherry pancake!".

