"ich bin ein berliner" ("i am a berliner") is a famous phrase from a june 26, 1963 speech by u.s. president john f. kennedy in west berlin. kennedy was underlining the support of the united states for democratic west germany shortly after communist east germany had erected the berlin wall as a deadly barrier to its citizens escaping to the west.

the speech is considered one of kennedy's best, and a notable moment of the cold war. it was a great morale boost for the west berliners, who feared absorption into the soviet empire. speaking from the balcony of rathaus schöneberg, kennedy said,

"two thousand years ago the proudest boast was civis romanus sum. today, in the world of freedom, the proudest boast is 'ich bin ein berliner.' all free men, wherever they may live, are citizens of berlin, and, therefore, as a free man, i take pride in the words 'ich bin ein berliner!'"

this message of defiance was aimed as much at the soviets as it was the berliners, and was a clear statement of u.s. policy in the wake of the berlin wall. however, kennedy also faced criticism inasmuch as his speech seemed to accept the new status quo following the division of berlin. kennedy said west berlin had been "besieged for 18 years" — alluding to the berlin airlift and other events — but critics said he had tacitly accepted that east berlin was part of the soviet bloc, despite the fact that all of berlin was under four-power occupation and technically part of neither west nor east germany.

the speech signaled american resolve in the face of communism, and helped boost kennedy's standing ahead of his meeting with soviet leader nikita khrushchev two months later, at which the two agreed the nuclear test ban treaty.

background  

see main article: history of berlin

germany's capital, berlin, was deep within the area controlled after world war ii by the soviet army. initially governed jointly in four sectors controlled respectively by the united states, united kingdom, france, and ussr, tensions of the cold war escalated until the soviet forces implemented the berlin blockade, which the the western allies relieved with a dramatic airlift.

afterward, the sectors controlled by the nato allies became an effective exclave of west germany, completely surrounded by east germany. from 1952, the border between east and west was closed everywhere but berlin. hundreds of thousands of east germans defected to the west via west berlin, a labour drain which threatened east germany with economic collapse.

in 1961 the east german government under walter ulbricht erected a barbed wire barrier around the soviet sector of berlin. though it was officially called the antifaschistischer schutzwall (anti-fascist protective barrier), its primary purpose was to keep east german citizens from crossing to the west. over a period of months the wall was rebuilt using concrete, and buildings were demolished to create a "death zone" in view of east german guards armed with machine guns. in 1962 the first attempted escape leading to a fatal shooting took the life of peter fechter. 

the west, including the united states, was accused of failing to respond forcefully to the erection of the wall. on july 25, 1961, president kennedy, with the april bay of pigs fiasco yet fresh, broadcast a presidential address. kennedy insisted that america would defend west berlin, asserting its four-power rights, even while making it clear that challenging the soviet presence in germany was not possible.

"jelly doughnut" urban legend

a common urban legend asserts that after kennedy made an embarrassing grammatical error by saying "ich bin ein berliner," referring to himself not as a citizen of berlin, but as a common pastry, he received gales of laughter as a result. 

berliner is the name given to doughnuts filled with plum sauce or jam in most of germany, though not in berlin or the surrounding region, where they are known as pfannkuchen. kennedy should have said "ich bin berliner" to mean "i am a berliner (person from berlin)" rather than "ich bin ein berliner." by adding the indefinite article ein, his statement implied he was a non-human berliner, thus "i am a jelly doughnut." in the legend, the speech was followed by uproarious laughter.   kennedy did indeed stress the ein.

the urban legend aspect of this incident is that the crowd laughed at kennedy in ridicule.  in fact, they were gracious and courteous, ignored his grammatical errors, and cheered him on.

the urban legend apparently arose in florida in the 1980s, culminating in an article repeating it in the new york times in 1988. although it has no basis in fact, the legend has since been repeated by other reputable media outlets, such as the bbc, and in books about germany written by english-speaking authors.

however, the legend is unknown in germany, where kennedy's speech is considered a landmark in german postwar history. common souvenirs in berlin depicting a doughnut covered with the inscription "ich bin ein berliner," which are often thought by american tourists to refer to this legend, represent little more than a play on words.

in addition to his grammatical mistake kennedy pronounced the sentence with a strong boston accent, reading from his note "ish bin ine bear-lean-ar," which he had written out phonetically.

 the phrase in fiction and popular culture
the british music group pop will eat itself varied the phrase to "ich bin ein ausländer" ("i am a foreigner") as the title and chorus of a 1994 song expressing solidarity with immigrants and condemning anti-immigrant hate speech as inevitably stoking violence, insisting that "freedom of expression doesn't make it all right."

the phrase is alluded to in an episode of the simpsons entitled "little girl in the big ten".  lisa simpson is reluctant to enroll in a gymnastics school in order to help her pass her physical education class at springfield elementary.  however, after having been inspired by president kennedy while knocked unconscious she awakes to claim "ich bin ein gymnast!". homer simpson then remarks that she must have dreamed about hitler again. also, in another episode of the series, abraham simpson has a flashback in which he hears john f. kennedy say the phrase "ich bin ein berliner", prompting abraham to yell "he's a nazi!" shortly before tackling kennedy. throughout the series, mayor "diamond joe" quimby, a caricature of the kennedys, uses variations of the phrase multiple times when addressing large crowds ("ich bin ein springfield swap meet patron!").

british comedian eddie izzard talks about john kennedy's "i am a doughnut" speech in his stand-up act "dress to kill".

in terry pratchett's book monstrous regiment (p. 329 of the hardcover), samuel vimes makes a speech in which he says "ze chzy brogocia proztfik!", intending this to mean "i am a citizen of borogravia!". what he actually says is "i am a cherry pancake!".

