the holy grail, by dante gabriel rossetti
the holy grail, by dante gabriel rossetti

in christian mythology, the holy grail is the cup from which jesus drank at the last supper, or alternatively a cup that caught his blood when he was on the cross, or both. it was said to have the power to heal all wounds. a theme joined to the christianised arthurian mythos relates to the quest for the holy grail.  the legend may be a combination of genuine christian lore with a celtic myth of a cauldron endowed with special powers.

according to the catholic encyclopedia, late medieval writers, after the cycle of grail romances was well established, identifying the cup of the last supper with the grail, came up with a false etymology from the fact that in old french, san grial means "holy grail" and sang rial means "royal blood."  since then, sangreal is sometimes employed to lend a medievalizing air in referring to the holy grail. whether graal is celtic or old french, it never refers to any cup or bowl but this.

the grail legend is a gothic legend, which came together in the form of written romances, deriving perhaps from some pre-christian folkloric hints, in the later 12th and early 13th centuries. the early grail romances centered on percival and were then woven into the more general arthurian fabric. the grail romances were french; though they were translated into other european vernaculars, no new essential elements were added.

myths of the grail fall into two kinds of narratives: the history or fate of the grail and the quest for the grail.

fate of the grail
the legend that the grail was brought to britain by joseph of arimathea, when he travelled to the british isles as the first christian missionary to the country and established the first christian church in the british isles made its appearance in a verse romance, joseph d'arimathie, by robert de boron, composed between 1170 and 1212.

a number of knights undertook the quest for the grail, in tales that have become annexed to the arthurian mythos.  some of these tales tell of knights who succeeded, like parsifal or the virginal galahad; others tell of knights who failed to achieve the grail because of their tragic flaws, like lancelot. in wolfram's telling, the grail was kept safe at the castle of munsalvaesche (mons salvationis) or montsalvat, entrusted to titurel, the first grail-king. some, not least the monks of montserrat, have identified the castle with the real sanctuary of montserrat in catalonia.

the fate of the holy grail is unknown, with ownership attributed to various groups (including the knights templar). there are cups claimed to be the grail in several churches like the valencia cathedral. other stories claim that the grail is buried beneath rosslyn chapel or is to be found deep in the spring at glastonbury tor.

quest for the grail
the date of grail sequences in the welsh folktales, the mabinogion are older than the surviving manuscripts (13th century).there is an english poem sir percyvelle, of the 15th century. then the  legends of king arthur and the holy grail were collected in the 15th century by thomas malory for his morte d'arthur which gave the body of legend its classic form.

literary sources in french courtly literature, grail sources include chretien de troyes' conte du graal, in germany, wolfram von eschenbach's parzifal, both early 13th century. wolfram stated that his tale came from a provencal lay of a certain kyot (guiot), who has not been identified. wolfram also states that his romance is being transcribed for him, so the inference is that his sources were not written.

richard wagner recast wolfram's version of the legend in his opera parsifal (1883).

casual metaphor
the legend of the holy grail is the basis of the use of the term holy grail in modern-day culture.  a "holy grail" is seen as the ultimate goal for a person or organization to achieve.  for instance, in sports, fans of the professional baseball refer to a world series championship as their team's holy grail.

modern retellings
the movie excalibur is a traditional representation of the tale, while the fisher king and indiana jones and the last crusade place the quest in a modern setting.  monty python and the holy grail is a comedy spoofing clichés connected with the legend. 

