himachal pradesh  (hindi: हिमाचल प्रदेश), formally the punjab hill states, is a mostly mountainous state in northwest india. neighbouring regions are tibet to the east, jammu and kashmir to the north and northwest, punjab to the southwest, haryana and uttar pradesh to the south and uttaranchal to the southeast.

it is 55,658 sq km (21,490 sq mi) and the population in 2001 stood at 6,077,248 as per the provisional results of the census of india 2001. the population of himachal pradesh includes estimated population of entire kinnaur district, where the population enumeration of census of india, 2001 could not be conducted due to natural calamity. in terms of population it holds the same position (twenty first) among states and union territories as at the previous census. the population of the state rose by 17.53% between 1991-2001. the sex ratio (i.e., the number of females per thousand males) of population was recorded as 970, which has declined from 976 in the previous census. total literacy of the state rose to 77.13% from 63.94% in 1991.

the state capital is shimla (formerly british india's summer capital under the name simla), other major towns are dharamsala, kangra, mandi, kullu, chamba, hamirpur, dalhousie and manali.  the western himalaya lies in the north and east and the smaller shiwalik (or shivalik) range in the south.  the ghaggar river originates in the shivalik range. the main rivers are the sutlej (home of the bhakra nangal dam project) and the beas. the bridge on the sutlej river at kandraur, bilaspur district is one of the highest in asia.

history
himachal pradesh came under british control in the middle of the 19th century. the british annexed kangra district, which includes present-day kangra, kullu, hamirpur, and lahul and spiti districts, in 1846 at the conclusion of the first anglo-sikh war. the remainder of himachal pradesh was made up of a number of princely states; see hill states. 

under the british raj, kangra district was part of the british province of punjab, and the princely states, then known as the simla hill states, were under the authority of punjab until the early 1930's, when the punjab states agency was created, under the direct authority of the governor-general of india. the punjab hill states agency, which included most of the princely states in present-day himachal pradesh, was separated from punjab states agency in 1936.

india became independent of the united kingdom in 1947, and himachal pradesh was established as a state on april 15 1948, composed of the territory of some 30 hill states (including feudatories) that acceded to the government of india, while bilaspur remained a separate state in the indian union till its merger with himachal pradesh on july 1, 1954 by an act of the indian parliament. 

himachal pradesh became a union territory on november 1, 1956. the state was enlarged in 1966 by the transfer of the districts of shimla, kangra (which included present-day districts of kangra and hamirpur), kullu, lahul and spiti, and una from punjab state. 
it was made the 18th state of india on january 25, 1971.

 geography and climate 
main article: geography of himachal pradesh

 districts 
frame|map of himachal pradesh
 kangra
 hamirpur
 mandi
 bilaspur
 una
 chamba
 lahul and spiti
 sirmaur
 kinnaur
 kullu
 solan
 shimla, containing the state capital

 flora and fauna 

economy

main article: economy of himachal pradesh

the himachali economy is mainly dependent on tourism and apples. there are also some natural minerals in the state. there are two large cement factories catering not only to the people of himachal but also selling in other states.

due to the abundance of perennial rivers, himachal also sells hydro electricity to other states such as delhi.

transport
though himachal boasts of two airports and various narrow gauge rail tracks, roads are the main mode of transport. 

the government-owned himachal road transport corporation runs a network of buses across the state and himachal pradesh being a major tourist destination, there is no dearth of private buses and taxis.

three national highways pass through the state connecting the major towns. national highway 20 passes through palampur, dharamsala and nurpur before terminating at pathankot. nh 21 connects chandigarh with manali and nh 22 connects chandigarh with shimla and extends right upto the tibet border.

travelling through roads can be risky during monsoon season due to  frequent landslides and washouts.

the narrow gauge rail network connects kalka with shimla and another one connects pathankot with jogindernagar.

an airport at jubbarhatti near shimla and another one at bhuntar near kullu make for a very picturesque landing. the flights operate only seasonally due to extreme cold conditions during winters.

 demographics 

culture
the major spoken languages are pahari -- mahasui (in upper shimla region), kulluyi, lahauli, kinnauri, chambyali, sirmauri, bilaspuri, dogri, kangri, punjabi, hindi and mandyali. kangri and mandyali are believed to be twin dialects originating from punjabi.

hinduism, buddhism and sikhism are the main religions. dharmshala, in the western area of the state is the home of the dalai lama and many tibetan refugees.

government and politics
