the harrison narcotics tax act (ch. 1, ) was a united states federal law that regulated and taxed the production, importation, and distribution of opiates. the act was proposed by representative francis burton harrison of new york and was approved on december 17, 1914.

"an act to provide for the registration of, with collectors of internal revenue, and to impose a special tax on all persons who produce, import, manufacture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, or give away opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or preparations, and for other purposes." the courts interpreted this to mean that physicians could prescribe narcotics to patients in the course of normal treatment, but not for the treatment of addiction.

although technically illegal for purposes of distribution and use, the distribution, sale and use of cocaine was still legal for registered companies and individuals.  

history
international background
following the spanish-american war the u.s. took the philippines. confronted with a licensing system for opium addicts, a commission of inquiry was appointed to examine alternatives to this system. the brent commission recommended that narcotics should be subject to international control.

this proposal was supported by the united states department of state and in 1906 president theodore roosevelt called for an international opium conference, the shanghai commission in 1909. in 1906 an imperial edict,  had been published prohibiting the cultivation and smoking of opium in the chinese empire over a period of ten years. this was being implemented with greater success than had been anticipatedunocd:the shanghai opium commission the british empire had since the opium war in the 1840s by military means forced china to allow a large import of opium from india.

a second conference was held at the hague in 1911, and out of it came the first international drug control treaty, the international opium convention of 1912, 

domestic background
in the 1800s opiates and cocaine were mostly unregulated drugs. in the 1890s the sears & roebuck catalogue, which was distributed to millions of americans homes, offered a syringe and a small amount of cocaine for $1.50. addicts of opium were very frequent. it has been estimated that one us. citizen of 400 was an addict of opium in 1914, much more  frequent than today, and the number had increased fast for a number of years. edward marshall: uncle sam is the worst drug fiend in the world, new york times 1911  the opium addicts were mostly women who were prescribed and dispensed legal opiates by physicians and pharmacist for ”female problems”, probably mostly pain at menstruation, or white men and chinese at the opium dens. between two-thirds and three-quarters of these addicts were women.stephen r. kandall, m.d.:women and addiction in the united states—1850 to 1920 

"of all the nations of the world,the united states consumes most habit-forming drugs per capita. opium, the most pernicious drug known to humanity, is surrounded, in this country, with far fewer safeguards than any other nation in europe fences it with." (dr. hamilton wright, united states first opium commissioner,  new york times, 1911)

at the beginning of the 20th century, cocaine began to be linked to crime. in 1900 the journal of the american medical association published an editorial stating, "negroes in the south are reported as being addicted to a new form of vice--that of 'cocaine sniffing' or the 'coke habit'."  some newspapers later claimed cocaine use caused blacks to rape white women and was improving their pistol marksmanship. chinese immigrants were blamed for importing the opium-smoking habit to the u.s. the 1903 blue-ribbon citizens' panel, the committee on the acquirement of the drug habit concluded, "if the chinaman cannot get along without his dope we can get along without him". by 1914 forty-six states had regulations on cocaine and twenty-nine states had laws against opium, morphine, and heroine.  p. 14-15. mentions new york times article about drug crazed blacks.  p. 572 (google print) 

the , dr. hamilton wright, appointed by theodore roosevelt, stated that "cocaine is often the direct incentive to the crime of rape by the  negroes of the south and other sections of the country", even though there was no evidence to support this claim. wright also stated that "one of the most unfortunate phases of smoking opium in this country is the large number of women who have become involved and were living as common law wives or cohabitating with chinese in the chinatowns of our various cities".   wetherington states that the 1909 shanghai commission made this comment.   "a 1910 federal survey reported that "cocaine is often the direct incentive to the crime of rape by the negroes in the south and other sections of the country. southern sheriffs believed cocaine even rendered blacks impervious to .32-cal. bullets (as a result many police departments switched to .38-cal.)." 

debate
in 1914, the senate considered the harrison bill. the act was supported by the secretary of state william jennings bryan who urged that the law be passed to fulfill the obligation of the new international treaty. 

several authors have argued that the debate was merely to regulate trade and collect a tax. however, the committee reportcommittee on finance (ways and means committee, senate reports, vol. 1, of the 63rd congress, 2nd session on senate bill 6552, report #258, pp. 3-4) prior to the debate on the house floor and the debate itself, discussed the rise of opiate use in the united states.  harrison stated that "the purpose of this bill can hardly be said to raise revenue, because it prohibits the importation of something upon which we have hitherto collected revenue." later harrison stated, "we are not attempting to collect revenue, but regulate commerce."   house representative thomas sisson stated, "the purpose of this bill--and we are all in sympathy with it--is to prevent the use of opium in the united states, destructive as it is to human happiness  and human life." p. 14-15    

the drafters played on fears of “drug-crazed, sex-mad negroes” and made 