es:historia del cristianismofr:histoire du christianisme
this article outlines the history of christianity and provides links to relevant topics.

 roots of christianity 

 the jewish background 

christianity emerged from judaism in the first century of the common era. christian brought from judaism its scriptures (the old testament) and fundamental doctrines such as monotheism, and the belief in a moshiach (hebrew term for messiah; this term is more commonly known as christ (christos in greek). the modern jewish picture of the messiah is a national one - the deliverer of israel, and has significant differences from how christians understand the term. christianity has a different form of the messiah, in which  god himself came in the flesh as jesus, and became the deliverer of both israel and of all mankind. christians and jews have disagreed about which of them has the truer conception of messiah from the time christianity was born until now, often relying on different interpretations of various passages from the old testament or tanach.

christianity also continued many of the patterns found in judaism at that time, such as: adapting the form of synagogue worship to church parishes; use of incense in prayer; use of psalms and other scriptures; a priesthood; a religious calendar in which certain events and/or beliefs are specifically commemorated on certain days each year; use of chant in hymns and prayer; ascetic disciplines such as fasting and almsgiving. christians initially adopted the jewish septuagint as their scripture or bible, and later also canonized the books of the new testament.

judaism
the messiah prophesies
essenes

 the life of jesus of nazareth 

jesus christ
the twelve apostles
pharisee

 the earliest emergence of christianity 

starting with the events recorded in the gospels and acts, christianity grew from the personal practice of a minority of jews, to the dominant religious group of the mediterranean world in little over 300 years. it also gained important extensions to the east and south of the mediterranean.  this section will examine those first 300 years.

the earliest church: jerusalem
the gentile church
house churches
dura europos, syria

the martyrs
polycarp

the apologists
justin martyr
irenaeus of lyons

 early controversies 

disputes of doctrine began early on. the newly-organised church organised councils to sort matters out. some groups were rejected as heretics.

gnosticism
monarchianism
nestorianism
apollinarianism
arianism

ecumenical council

 competing religions 

christianity was not the only religion seeking and finding converts in the 1st century.  modern historians of the roman world often discern interest in what they tend to call mystery religions or mystery cults beginning in the last century of the roman republic and increasing during the centuries of the roman empire.  roman authors themselves, such as livy, tell of the importation of "foreign gods" during times of stress in the roman state.  judaism, too, was receiving converts and in some cases actively evangelising.  the new testament reflects a class of people referred to as 'believers in god' who are thought to be gentile converts, perhaps those who had not submitted to circumcision;  philo of alexandria makes explicit the duty of jews to welcome converts.

mithraism - to distinguish from mithra, who may be a separate thing inside persian religions.  it's complicated, like all the rest of this.
mandaeanism - the group in which mani is reputed to have been brought up
manichaeism - the group that came from mani
isis and serapis
sabazios

 second and third centuries 
in the third century conventionally educated converts began to produce two kinds of writings that help us understand the developing shapes of christianity - works aimed at a broad audience of educated non-christians and works aimed at those who considered themselves inside the church.  the writing for non-christians is usually called apologetic in the same sense that the speech given by socrates in his defense before the athenian assembly is called his apology - the word in greek meant "speech for the defense" rather than the modern more limited denotation of "statement expressing regret".  the apologists, as these authors are sometimes known, made a presentation for the educated classes of the beliefs of christians, often coupled with an attack on the beliefs and practices of the pagans.  other writings had the purpose of instructing and admonishing fellow christians.

tertullian
clement of alexandria
origen
the pagan revival of the third century
decius
cyprian

 many of the early writings are translated into english in the ante-nicene fathers books.

 fourth century 

 development of the canon of scripture 

bible
biblical canon

 christianity legalized in the roman empire 

constantine i
arianism
first council of nicaea
nicene creed

 many of the writings from this period are translated into english in the nicene and post-nicene fathers books.

 fourth-century pagan revival by rome 

julian the apostate

 the christology controversies 

diodore, theodore and apollinarius
cyril of alexandria and nestorius
the monophysite council at ephesus and the reaction at the council of chalcedon
the search for reconciliation and the doctine of one will

 christianity becomes a state religion 

theodosius i
ambrose of milan
john chrysostom
rise of desert monasticism

 fifth century 

 the conversion of the mediterranean world 

augustine of hippo
jerome

 developing christianity outside the mediterranean world 

christianity was not restricted to the mediterranean basin and its hinterlands;  at the time of jesus a large proportion of the jewish population lived in mesopotamia outside the roman empire, especially in the city of babylon, where much of the talmud was developed.

ethiopian orthodoxy
christianity in the sassanian empire
thomas christians (malabar christians?) in india
christianity comes to great britain and ireland
christianity comes to ireland and the evolution of celtic christianity
irish missionaries and the spread of christianity to britain and northern europe
the establishment of papal authority in ireland

 development of the papacy 

pope
papacy
damasus
leo
gregory the great

 the rise of islam 

islam
history of islam
the expansion of the islamic empire
crusades
persecution of christians
iconoclasm

 spread of christianity to central and eastern europe 
 cyril and methodius
 russian orthodox church founded in the tenth century

 church & state in the medieval west 

pope gregory vii - hildebrand
inquisition
witchhunts

 schisms between east and west 

great schism
eastern orthodoxy
apostolic succession, pope
catholicism

 the later middle ages 

the conciliar movement
christian humanism
end of the byzantine empire in 1453

 early america 
conquistadors
santeria, a fusion of catholicism with traditional west african religious traditions originally among slaves

 the protestant reformation and counter reformation 

the role of johann gutenberg's printing press in the spread of religious dissent
martin luther
john calvin
king james version
council of trent
thirty years' war

 protestantism 

discusses the rise of the major denominations after the reformation, and the challenges faced by catholicism.
lots missing here.
anabaptists
baptist church
presbyterian church
anglican church
methodist church
pentecostal
lutheran church
brethren

 19th century 

catholic resurgence in romantic europe
anglo-catholic or oxford movement in the church of england
missionaries and colonialism

 the second great awakening

 the earliest controversies resurface in new forms 
the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints
seventh-day adventist church
jehovah's witnesses
unification church
congress of religions, 1893

 the restoration movement 

the puritans
the english civil war
nonconformists
campbellites or stone-campbell churches
the christian_church_(disciples_of_christ)
the church of christ movement in britain and the us
the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints
the religious society of friends, or quakers

 anti-clericalism and atheistic communism 

in many revolutionary movements the church was associated with the established repressive regimes.  thus, for example, after the french revolution and the mexican revolution there was a distinct anti-clerical tone in those countries that exists to this day.  on a more extreme level, karl marx condemned religion as the "opium of the people" and the marxist-leninist states of the twentieth century were officially atheistic.

 20th century and beyond 

christianity in the 20th century was characterised by accelerating fragmentation. the century saw the rise of both liberal and conservative splinter groups, as well as a general secularisation of western society. the roman catholic church instituted many reforms in order to modernise. missionaries also made inroads in the far east, establishing further followings in china, taiwan, and japan. at the same time, persecution in communist eastern europe and and the soviet union brought many eastern orthodox christians to western europe and the united states, leading to greatly increased contact between western and eastern christianity.

the persecution of christians today has its own entry.

 fundamentalism 

 creationist backlash to darwinism, reaction to the critical method of biblical interpretation.

 reforms 

 second vatican council
 ecumenical initiatives
 anathemas from the great schism mutually revoked by the pope and the patriarch of constantinople
 pope john paul ii

 the rise of free evangelical churches 

 and the corresponding decline of mainstream protestant denominations. maybe this is too u.s.-centric? also, its impact on worldwide christianity remains to be seen, but the polarization of the anglican communion is, imho, worthy of mention. at least, i've been tracking it at http://anglican.swiki.net/ because i find it interesting. <>< tbc

evangelism in the 10/40 window

 how evangelicals defined and prioritized efforts to reach the "unreached" in the late 20th and early 21st centuries, focusing on countries roughly between 10 and 40 degrees north lattitude.

 the spread of secularism 

in europe there has been a general move away from religious observation and belief in christian teachings and a move towards secularism.  for example the gallup international millennium survey showed that only about one sixth of europeans attend regular religious services, less than half gave god "high importance", and only about 40% believe in a "personal god".  nevertheless the large majority considered that they "belong" to a religious denomination.

in north america and south america, the other two continents where christianity is the dominant professed religion, religious observation is much higher than in europe.