eo:irlandofr:irlandepl:irlandianl:ierland (land)de:irland

this article deals with the republic of ireland. the island as a whole is dealt with at ireland; there is also northern ireland.

eo:irlandofr:irlandepl:irlandia

image:ireland_flag_medium.png
ireland is the official name of the state in the english language, while éire is the official name of the state in the irish language, according to the constitution of ireland.  the official description of the state is republic of ireland, according to the republic of ireland act, 1948.

 economy 

ireland is a small, modern, trade-dependent economy with growth averaging a robust 9% in 1995-99. agriculture, once the most important sector, is now dwarfed by industry, which accounts for 39% of gdp and about 80% of exports and employs 28% of the labor force. although exports remain the primary engine for ireland's robust growth, the economy is also benefiting from a rise in consumer spending and recovery in both construction and business investment. over the past decade, the irish government has implemented a series of national economic programs designed to curb inflation, reduce government spending, and promote foreign investment. the unemployment rate has been halved; job creation remains a primary concern of government policy. recent efforts have concentrated on improving workers' qualifications and the education system. ireland joined in launching the euro currency in january 2000 along with 10 other eu nations.

 culture 

the national anthem is amhran na bhfiann (the soldiers' song). an understanding of irish history also come from examination of pádraic pearse's poem mise éire.

ireland has produced irish traditional music, george berkeley, james joyce, oscar wilde, guinness and many other fine things.

 government 

see also taoiseach, president of ireland

image:www.wesleyjohnston.com-users-ireland-maps-ireland_in_europe.gif

from the cia world factbook 2000:

 history of ireland
 geography of ireland
 provinces of ireland
 demographics of ireland
 politics of ireland
 economy of ireland
 communications in ireland
 transportation in ireland
 military of ireland
 foreign relations of ireland

 international rankings 

 world-wide press freedom index rank 6 out of 139 countries

