constance/anna
what about constance of autria/konstanze of habsburg, wife of sigismund_i_of_sweden? shouldnt she be listed here as well?
or is it anna? could sb fix the genealogy of the habsburg side of the vasa famly?
http://www3.dcs.hull.ac.uk/cgi-bin/gedlkup/n=royal?royal5506 is this right?
--piotrus 16:52, 28 apr 2004 (utc)

spelling

hapsburg or habsburg - which is more commonly used?
six of one...i think the p has an edge in english, but not necessarily "right" - jhk

google sez:

habsburg 32,100
hapsburg 16,400

and that includes filtering for pages in english only. -- paul drye 

a google count merely shows the extent of the spread of the misinformation, not the validity of it.
stanzegel 20:32, 22 oct 2004 (utc)
 
the correct form is definitely "habsburg". the "p" is an error derived from the hardness of the german pronunciation. no habsburg would ever have called him/herself a hapsburg.

although some english-language dictionaries may describe hapsburg as a "variant" spelling, i suggest they are merely taking the easy way out by accepting or legitimizing the frequent misspelling. in german it is invariably spelled habsburg, and that is the way the family itself spells it today. (i have exchanged correspondence with dr. otto v. habsburg, the head of the house, so i have authoritative examples.)
if we were needing to transliterate from, say, russian to english where there are different symbols, there would be legitimate reasons to disagree upon the best spelling using latin letters (e.g. the germans spell gorbachev as gorbaschow), but because german already uses the same symbols as english, there is no reason to spell a german name in english differently than the original.

the reason for the misspelling is the usual one involving surnames: transcription into one language of the sound of a word pronounced in another one. just as d and t are linguisticly similar and often interchanged, so are b and p. thus habsburg becomes hapsburg or even hapsberg!

an extreme example of this phenomenon is the surname schultz whose sound transcribed into polish is the surname borne by the author tad szulc. the distortion continues when those unfamiliar with polish diction try to pronounce what they see written (they'd come up with the sound "zulk" instead of schultz) and someone hearing them say it writes down in english what they heard: zulk. after years of correcting folks, the szulc family gives up and changes the spelling because it is easier than correcting everyone. eventually zulk will become sulk and so on. (it is by that same process that geronimo and herman and jerome are all forms of the same name.)

if we want the wikipedia to be authoritative, i think we need to state clearly and unambiguously the fact that the correct spelling is habsburg and that the other spelling is not an "acceptable alternative" but is just plain wrong. i did such an edit at the start of the habsburg article, but another person changed my frequently misspelled as phrase to also spelled. i think frequently misspelled as is more accurate, but i will not start an edit war by changing it back; i will leave that for someone else to decide and do.

stanzegel 20:32, 22 oct 2004 (utc)

in fact, what we want for wikipedia is to cite authoritative sources rather than substitute the judgements of wikipedia's editors for the judgements of those authorities. english language dictionaries are, in this case, the proper authorities, and the two i've consulted have habsburg and hapsburg as variants. can you cite an english language dictionary that calls "hapsburg" a misspelling? if so, we can cite it in the article. in fact, if you'll look at the history of the article, this question has been gone over before: we're not a dictionary, we're not a style guide, and our job is to report what the dictionaries or style guides say, not decide which of them is correct (now) or which may have been correct throughout history as both habsburgs and hapsburgs were written of. - nunh-huh 23:51, 22 oct 2004 (utc)

 except that it's not an issue of decision that all versions other than the sole native one are simply not the right spelling. we can certainly document that hapsburg has found its way into english, but it's still wrong to insist that an outdated spelling that hasn't been right from the start should be mentioned on equal terms with the canonical one. --joy [shallot] 11:12, 23 oct 2004 (utc)

it is if you can't find an english-language dictionary to cite, or a usage guide that states that "habsburg" is preferred and "hapsburg" is deprecated. in the absence of such a citation, we can only document that the words are listed as variants. the assertion that "hapsburg" is a misspelling is simply erroneous, which is why i removed it; if someone can find a citable authority that "habsburg" is the preferred variant we can attribute it and insert that opinion. what we don't want to do is insert our own (unattributed) opinions. - nunh-huh 13:42, 23 oct 2004 (utc)

 if you don't think wikipedia should bother documenting preferences between words, why would english dictionaries? after all, dictionaries just list words and provide information about them, it's the encyclopedias that discuss topics. habsburg and hapsburg barely even qualify as english words. our article discusses the german family under their german name; an old english word that became from the loanword needs to be qualified as such.
 fwiw, my copy of the oed doesn't even include the word. it only has 1k pages, but still. --joy [shallot] 22:21, 24 oct 2004 (utc)

english dictionaries do document p