henry vii (1457-1509), king of england (1485-1509), was the founder of the tudor dynasty and is generally acknowledged as one of england's most successful kings.

henry tudor was the posthumous son of edmund tudor, a half-brother of king henry vi of england.  his mother was margaret beaufort, a descendant of king edward iii. from his father, he inherited the title earl of richmond; from his mother, his questionable claim to the throne of england.  he was born in pembroke, but grew up in exile in brittany having fled from the yorkist kings of england.  as an individual with some claim to the throne (even a very vague one) he knew the yorkist monarchs would want him dead.

after the failure of the revolt of his cousin, the duke of buckingham, henry vii became the leading lancastrian contender for the throne of england.  having gained the support of the abandoned family of the late yorkist king edward iv, he landed with a force in wales and marched into england, accompanied by his uncle, jasper tudor, a military mastermind.  wales had traditionally been a yorkist stronghold, and henry owed the support he gathered to his ancestry, being directly descended, through his father, from the lord rhys.  he amassed an army only slightly smaller than the king's, and travelled north.

there his lancastrian forces decisively defeated the yorkists under richard iii at the battle of bosworth field in 1485.  this victory ended the long running wars of the roses between the two houses.  henry's claim to the throne was tenuous and based upon a lineage of illegitimate succession.  however, this was no barrier to the throne, since, in the absence of an act of succession, parliament had the ability to award the crown to whomever it pleased.  henry won it by conquest.

<tr><td>image: henry7.jpg
principal to henry's concerns on attaining the monarchy was the question of establishing the strength and supremacy of his rule.  there were few other claimants to the throne left alive after the long running and bloody civil wars, so his main worry was pretenders such as perkin warbeck who were backed by disaffected nobles.  henry succeeded in securing his crown by a number a number of means, but principally by dividing and undermining the power of the nobility.  

henry's first action was to declare himself king with effect from the day before the battle, thus ensuring that anyone who had fought against him could, technically, be termed guilty of treason.  it is interesting to note, therefore, that he spared richard's designated heir, john de la pole, earl of lincoln.  he would have cause to regret his leniency two years later, when lincoln rebelled and attempted to set a boy pretender, lambert simnel, on the throne in henry's place.  lincoln was killed at the battle of stoke, but simnel's life was spared and he became a royal servant.

simnel had been put forward as "edward vi", impersonating the young edward, earl of warwick, son of george, duke of clarence, who was still imprisoned in the tower of london.  henry had shown uncharacteristic leniency in dealing with edward, and did not find a pretext for executing him until he had grown into adulthood, in 1499.  edward's elder sister, margaret pole, who had the next best claim on the throne, inherited her father's earldom of salisbury, and survived well into the next reign.

another methods henry used to secure his throne was to carry out his promise to marry elizabeth of york, daughter and heir of king edward iv, an act that unified the warring houses.  he was a fiscally prudent monarch who restored the fortunes of an effectively bankrupt exchequer by introducing efficient mechanisms of taxation.  in this he was supported by his chancellor, archbishop john morton, whose "fork" was a catch-22 method of ensuring that nobles paid the appropriate taxes.  royal government was also reformed with the introduction of the king's council that kept the nobility in check.

his elder son arthur having died in 1502, on his death in 1509, he was succeeded by his second son, henry viii.  henry vii did not want the negotiations that had led to the betrothal of his elder son to catherine of aragon to go to waste, so he arranged a dispensation for his younger son to marry his brother's widow -- normally a degree of relationship that precludes marriage in the roman catholic church.  henry arranged a dispensation from pope julius ii.

henry's first daughter margaret was married first to james iv of scotland, and their son became james v of scotland, whose daughter became mary queen of scots.  margaret tudor's second marriage was to archibald douglas; their grandson henry stewart lord darnley married mary queen of scots, whose son was james vi of scotland who inherited the throne of england as james i after the death of elizabeth i.  henry vii's other surviving daughter, mary, married first king louis xii of france and then, when he died of too much honeymooning, charles brandon duke of suffolk.  their daughter frances married henry grey, and their children included lady jane grey, in whose name her parents and in-laws tried to seize the throne after edward vi of england died.

king henry vii is buried at westminster abbey.

biographies:
 the son of prophecy: henry tudor's road to bosworth (©1985) by david rees (isbn 0-85159-005-5)

<tr>
<td width = 30% align = center>
preceded by:richard iii
<td width = 40%  align = center>
list of british monarchs
<td width = 30% align = center>
succeeded by:henry viii