de:henotheismus fr:hénothéisme ja:単一神教

in religion and philosophy, henotheism is a term coined by max müller, meaning belief in, and possible worship of, multiple gods, one of which is supreme. it is also called inclusive monotheism or monarchial polytheism. according to müller, it is "monotheism in principle and a polytheism in fact".

like monolatrism, henotheism is a cross between monotheism and polytheism. it differs from monolatrism, however, in that monolatrism is the belief in multiple gods, but the worship of only one, whereas henotheism may include the worship of several gods. thus, henotheism is more similar to polytheism than is monotheism.

henotheism in various religions

classical greco-roman paganism
while greek and roman religion began as polytheism, during the classical period the religion was thoroughly henotheistic. zeus (or jupiter) was viewed as the supreme, most-powerful king and father of the olympian gods. to illustrate, maximus tyrius (2nd century c.e.), stated:
"in such a mighty contest, sedition and discord, you will see one according law and assertion in all the earth, that there is one god, the king and father of all things, and many gods, sons of god, ruling together with him."

the philosophers plato and plotinus respectively taught that above the gods of traditional belief were the creator (demiurge) and "the one" also called god. the one is the impersonal unifying principle of divinity.
the one, demiurge & zeus constitute the classical pagan "three hypostasis"

hinduism
while hinduism is generally henotheistic; however, there is no consensus as to who is the supreme god. while the brahman is ultimately the impersonal unifying principle of divinity. visnavs, saivites & shaktis respectivley promote vishnu, shiva & shakti as the supreme personality of godhead.

it is inaccurate to say that brahma is the supreme god in hinduism. the hindu mythological lore recognizes three supreme gods (known as the trimurtis or the trinity) and none is considered by all hindus as the only god or supreme god; rather, the distinction is based on the function assigned to each god: brahma is the creator, vishnu the protector, and shiva the destroyer. the reason why brahma is not worshipped as a personal diety by hindus is because of a curse he received from sage bhrigu.

christianity
although christians adamantly label themselves as monotheists, some argue that christianity is properly a form of henotheism. most forms of christianity include the belief in a godhead consisting of god the father, jesus christ, and the holy spirit, with god the father being dominant "actor" and "creator". however, trinitarian christians strongly reject the view that the three persons of the godhead are three distinct gods. rather, they describe the three persons as having a single "substance", thus counting as one god. the council of nicea 325ce affirmed that god was "one substance (gk-ousia) and three persona (gk-hypostasis)". 
the christian trinity like the classical pagan hypostasis and hindu trimurti has an impersonal divine substance as it's unifying principle.

in addition, most christians reject the view that god the father is supreme over jesus christ and the holy spirit. 

in addition, many christians believe in what some consider to be a "pantheon" of angels, demons, and/or saints that are inferior to the trinity. christians do not label these beings as "gods", although they are attributed with supernatural powers, and are sometimes the object of prayer.

some non-trinitarian denominations of christianity are more clearly henotheistic. christian gnosticism is generally henotheistic. in addition, some (but not all) sects of mormonism view the members of the godhead as three distinct beings, where god the father is supreme. some latter day saints also believe in the existence of numerous other gods and goddesses who have no direct interest in this earth or humanity. see godhead (mormonism). though rare, some latter day saints also worship a heavenly mother in addition to god the father.

judaism
in very early judaism, the supreme god yhwh was frequently worshipped in conjunction with other gods such as baal, and asherah, and el. after the babylonian captivity, however, judaism became strictly monotheistic.

