for what it's worth, project gutenberg has a copy of "history of the catholic church" which would be an excellent source for building this article. while it was written by a catholic, and has some biases to be watched out for, it is not very biased, a failing of some church histories. by church i mean any church, i'm not singling out catholicism here. --dmerrill
nice pointer.  i'll go look. --michaeltinkler

be warned: the pg index cites it as volume i but there is in fact only one volume. this may be corrected by now. --dmerrill

interesting, but it is in fact just "...from the renaicance to the the french revolution"... not the whole thing. still looks usefull for that period - more interested in the early church myself - aw
me, too, asa.  for browsing use, let me suggest the catholic encyclopedia online.  it's of debateable availability ( i wouldn't just cut and paste from there), but it's incredibly useful.  it's greatest drawback is that it was written before the great age of archaeology (i.e., the 20th century), so it represents a great use of the textual tradition. --michaeltinkler

seems that some of the "competitors of early christianity" are *forms* of early christianity, just forms that did not survive. it is certainly not npov to state those forms don't count as christianity. --dmerrill
=========

           

hmmm.  re-read the 'gnosticism' article.  "form of christianity" would be going *very* far, and there is plenty of mainstream scholarly opinion in opposition to that stance.  if you want to include manichaeism under that heading, we ought to include islam and bahai, too - because, after all, they claim to be completing the message of christ (in very different ways, but it is what they say).  --michaeltinkler

 orthodoxy is often offended when those they claim to be heretics use a term that orthodoxy has claimed for itself.  but to allow the winners in a conflict to define the meaning of a label is to rewrite history as the winners would wish it.  before those theological debates were settled, there were many beliefs that fell under the category of "christianity".  i would strongly object to restricting the use of the term "christian" to an after-the-fact definition of what became considered orthodox christianity.

 history shows that there were times when different people had very different ideas of what christianity was. in the first millenium, what usually happened is that synods and councils were held, particularly the ecumenical councils, at which the attending bishops defined what was christian and what wasn't, and also defined doctrines, labels, and so forth. from an historical perspective, the decisions of those councils have for the most part prevailed. where they haven't, it's because of schisms, particularly with the oriental orthodox, and later with the roman catholic church and of course the thousands of protestant denominations.

how should this page work along side christianity? which subjects exaclty belong on which page? just throwing the question out there... also: i would consider calling gnosticism a "form" of christianity to be rediculous -- aw
there were gnostic groups that may or may not have considered themselves christian and which some modern scholars consider varieties of christianity (and others do not).  then there were groups like the mandaeans, who were (and still are) gnostics who are explicitly un-christian, saying that jesus hijacked the message of john the baptist.  gnosticism, given it's fragmentary presentation, is hard to define.  some of 'em count, some of 'em don't.  to include them all here is to condescend to their sense of difference.  to exclude them is to be accused of being in denial.  so, present 'em and exactly how out of the mainstream they were, which isn't hard.  the mandaeans are easily defined as opponents.  the manichaeans are a little harder - they used the language of church/bishop/priest.  their treatment of judaism and the old testament (specifically anti-yahwist and probably anti-semitic) is important. --michaeltinkler

absolutely, michael. discussion here should be limited to gnostic christianity, not gnosticism as a whole. the nag hammadi documents for instance, are evidence of overlap between gnosticism and christianity (gospel of thomas). --dmerrill

this is coming along well, eh? :)  can't believe i forgot to put crusades under my "rise of islam" bit - doh. aw

do we have an article on witch burning? if so, where does it belong on the main article? --axelboldt
i would recommend a new section on christianity in the us (maybe between "the restoration" and "19th century").  in that you can link to salem etc. whether such articles allready exist, i dont know. it stikes me that witch burning was probably not confinfed to the us, but i can't think of a more appropiate place for it. maybe a new section on violence by supposed christians. you could also put crusades, inquistion  etc....   hm..... dunno, atm the article is cronylogical, but maybe it should be by topic? --aw

it was much more prevalent in europe, i think mainly in germany. there was a whole industry arround it, with handbooks about how to properly interrogate and torture witches etc. the salem cases are peanuts. --axelboldt

we have an article on witchhunts. --zundark, 2001 nov 20

the witchhunts are a renaissance pheonomenon, more or less.  the inquisition is earlier. --michaeltinkler
========
hello,
imho, witchhunts began after the reformation (middle 17ème) ? but there was another witchunt along with the beggar movment (beguines  and beggars, i don't know the word in english). i'm going to check in "jean delumeau, la grande peur en occident".
the inquisition is founded to fight against catharism which is an european phenomenon, sothing like a neo-manicheism. 
catharism is a very important phenomenon, syncretism  half-part manicheism and half-part christianism, and quite ascetic  between 9ème and 14ème siecle. 
when you think that :
the last concile against heresy takes place during the vth, 
islam rises during vi, then spread over southern europe, goes back the first time around x (las navas de tolosa), 
and, in the meanwhile around ixth, begins catharism in the south of france which spreads till sweden, germany, italy and yougoslavia where the last ones are seen during xiv ,
then, in italy (after 1453 and the fall of constantinople) begins the renaissance,
there never were any western triumphant orthodoxy :-))
bye
mulot

===========
hello,
1) thanks for your article : i translated it for the french wikipedia. 2) you ask : "maybe is it too us-centric ?". :-)))
yes : it is quite us centric for the modern period and later. so, i'am adding european issues in the french version.f.i., during the french revolution, the supreme being worship was a kind of theism (with celebrations) rising from the christian corpus. but the "constitution civile du clergé" (sorry, i don't know the words in english) demanded a loyalty sworn statement to clerks. ( i think you mean "clerics" here) also, about christianism in the far east, it began with nestorianism in the viiith s., then with franciscan in 16th, and jesuits in early 17th (remember mario ricci and the "chinese rites debate", then the greatest chinese wordbook is the ricci)
 i'm not enough easy english writer to give you these add-in in english. bye !
  mulot 
============

i've reordered the restoration movement under the 19th century and included a link to the second great awakening.  lds church is part of the restoration movement...many of its early leaders were campbellites before becoming mormon.  i believe both the disciples of christ and the church of christ originated from campbellite movement.  i've also left the lds church under early controversies resurface subtitle as it plays significant role with others in that group -randy 11/22/02
the christological controversies is missing the arius and athanasius accounts which would be the foundation of this section.
-marc telesha 12/5/2004

 christian mysticism 

in my opinion a line or two on christian mystics and mystic orders and a link to christian mysticism should be added.

 sounds fine, just keep it historical, obviously, so it fits with the rest of the article. edit boldly! there's quite a bit that the article doesn't have just because no on e has added it yet. wesley 17:58, 10 feb 2005 (utc)

sorry i would like to do that however i don't know the topic enough to write about it and also don't have time for researching. just wanted to remind that this is an important topic which by chance i found missing. i hope someone else will do this, while i'm working on medicine and space. everyone should spend their time on what they know and can write quickly and reliably about. sincerely. --eleassar777 20:13, 10 feb 2005 (utc)