mitch with the same meaning is still used in the westcountry, even amongst my generation. sjc

i'm no linguist, so i dont know where the following should be added to this article. my parents are irish, and here are some expressions they use: 
the word yoke is sometimes used where the word thing might be used in standard english.
e.g. "what's that yoke for?"

the word mind is sometimes used for the word remember.
e.g. "i mind when i was a boy"
mintguy

i've never heard that usage. it is used for "take care/of" - "mind yourself crossing the street", though i'm not sure that's an exclusively irish usage. -- jim regan 16:20 22 jun 2003 (utc)

"mind" meaning "take care" is famously english. on the london underground you continuously hear a recording of "mind the gap" as you step on or off the train. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)

i can't figure out where to add to this article either, so here goes (should be familiar to british viewers of father ted):
 ye is used for the second person plural
 feck, means steal, or rather "take without permission", and is used as a euphemism for the word "fuck"
 lad is used as a euphemism for penis
 eejit is a mis-spelled, mis-pronounced version of idiot
 the "a" is father is generally pronounced fah ther or fah der rather than faw ther
 gobshite means fool
 many words also in use in britain, such as arse for ass, bollocks for testicles, shite for shit
jimregan 13:46 apr 26, 2003 (utc)

contrary to the assumption that "fah ther" is a particularly irish pronunciation, "faw ther" is a particularly american pronunciation which is not used elsewhere. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)

this usa-ian is baffled by the sentence "irish english also always uses the "light l" sound." - how about an example?  - davidwbrooks 14:10, 2 sep 2003 (utc)

is there any particular reason that "mitch," of all the vocabulary available, is the only example included in this artcile? i'm not familliar with the language, but perhaps it could be made clear that this is an example, as opposed to being a particularly important word, which is how it looks now. barkingdoc

the present tenses example is wrong. an bhfuil is just the interrogative form of ta. the example i would use is "tá tú anois" vs "bíonn tú gach lá" - you are now vs you be every day.

alastair rae 15:45, 7 nov 2003 (utc)

craic (crack) may well be from scots and northern english.

in my experience of living with irish expats in the last couple of years, the most stand-out irishisms i notice are "after" as mentioned, plus "your man" to refer to any specific male person, and "the last day" to mean yesterday. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)