mitch with the same meaning is still used in the westcountry, even amongst my generation. sjc

i'm no linguist, so i dont know where the following should be added to this article. my parents are irish, and here are some expressions they use: 
the word yoke is sometimes used where the word thing might be used in standard english.
e.g. "what's that yoke for?"

the word mind is sometimes used for the word remember.
e.g. "i mind when i was a boy"
mintguy

i've never heard that usage. it is used for "take care/of" - "mind yourself crossing the street", though i'm not sure that's an exclusively irish usage. -- jim regan 16:20 22 jun 2003 (utc)

"mind" meaning "take care" is famously english. on the london underground you continuously hear a recording of "mind the gap" as you step on or off the train. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)

i can't figure out where to add to this article either, so here goes (should be familiar to british viewers of father ted):
 ye is used for the second person plural
 feck, means steal, or rather "take without permission", and is used as a euphemism for the word "fuck"
 lad is used as a euphemism for penis
 eejit is a mis-spelled, mis-pronounced version of idiot
 the "a" is father is generally pronounced fah ther or fah der rather than faw ther
 gobshite means fool
 many words also in use in britain, such as arse for ass, bollocks for testicles, shite for shit
jimregan 13:46 apr 26, 2003 (utc)

contrary to the assumption that "fah ther" is a particularly irish pronunciation, "faw ther" is a particularly american pronunciation which is not used elsewhere. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)

this usa-ian is baffled by the sentence "irish english also always uses the "light l" sound." - how about an example?  - davidwbrooks 14:10, 2 sep 2003 (utc)

 the canonical example is "film" which is pronounced as two syllables, almost fillum.  (cf. rhythm.)  in rp english this is a monosyllable, almost fiwm.  the w attempts to represent a dark l sound.  also "bottle" keeps the light l by changing the t to a sound between t and k.  irish children often mispronounce this "bockle" when learning to talk.

is there any particular reason that "mitch," of all the vocabulary available, is the only example included in this artcile? i'm not familliar with the language, but perhaps it could be made clear that this is an example, as opposed to being a particularly important word, which is how it looks now. barkingdoc

the present tenses example is wrong. an bhfuil is just the interrogative form of ta. the example i would use is "tá tú anois" vs "bíonn tú gach lá" - you are now vs you be every day.

alastair rae 15:45, 7 nov 2003 (utc)

craic (crack) may well be from scots and northern english.

 i have removed the reference to "crack" because i believe it not to be derived from irish ("craic", like "sessiún", is a recent gaelicisation). i think i have seen jane austen use "crack" in the sense of lively conversation, and there are usages like "wisecrack" in non-hiberno english. it is, however, clearly a feature of hiberno-english, just not of irish-language origin. brendanh 09:09, 31 mar 2004 (utc)

in my experience of living with irish expats in the last couple of years, the most stand-out irishisms i notice are "after" as mentioned, plus "your man" to refer to any specific male person, and "the last day" to mean yesterday. hippietrail 06:11, 9 mar 2004 (utc)

 amn't i? 

just to make a comment about everyday usage of irish english that is not yet mentioned here:

the often rhetorical phrase  "amn't i?" is widely used in everyday speech.

it is a contraction of "am not i?" or "am i not?" and is generally a used to reinforce a statement of fact or opinion. 

-where have you been?
-doesn't matter, i'm here now anyway, amn't i?

or

-look at me, mammy, i'm really getting tall, amn't i?

in standard english this is usually spoken as "aren't i?"

however note that the use of "aren't i?" is generally particularly grating to irish ears.

why this difference exists is unknown (to me) but may be due to the illogicality of placing a singular subject (i) with a plural verb (are).

if this be true, seems like the irish got this right. "amn't i" or "ain't i" appears more appropriate than "aren't i". pædia | talk 15:26, 2004 apr 29 (utc)

i remember, if i used this contraction as a child, my mother, who was ever-so-slightly anglo (her family had only been in ireland since the 16th century), would always correct me with the phrase "an almond is a nut". ;-) blorg 11:33, 23 jul 2004 (utc)

 amn't i? (2) 

interestingly, it's also very common in dublin (mostly in working-class areas) to use "amn't i not?", ie a double negative, instead of "am i?"

example: i'm not working tomorrow, amn't i not?

--attila the pooh 09:42, 12 jul 2004 (utc)

<shakes head>. "dubliners." in theory, there could be entire sections on dublin and cork hiberno-english! also some limerick terms, "sham" (mate?), "c'mere i want ya" (in a nasal whine), "i'll bust the head/chops off ya"/"c'mere i'll bust ya", "you lookin' at me?"/"what you lookin' at". charming hiberno-english. i'll add it later - or someone else can. zoney 12:56, 23 jul 2004 (utc)

 irish (english) 

true, 'irish' almost always refers to irish gaelic. however, american 