knap werk! - mathijs
dank je. - andre engels
yes, very impressive! --lms
you should work for the cia. :-d (the entire history they collected was about 5 lines long) --kq
i have amended the belgian revolution a bit. you made it sound like the flemings were forced into independence and though pro-french elements were responsible for igniting the revolt, the core sentiments among both flemings and walloons were more as i described imho. -- [[user:scipius]

---

i added a little known fact about wwi and the german army taking a short cut over a small bit of lands of the netherlands, maybe someone can add to this. -- golf

---

i always learned in school that there was no actual relation between the old frisians (in roman times), and the later ones? the new frisians took up the name of the region. (the remark about "still do")

i think this section is not exactly accurate.

the history of this small country starts with its first inhabitants, hunters that lived during the last ice age thousands of years ago. notable remains of that period include the monumental hunebeds in the province drenthe.

it makes it seem as if the hunebeds were put up by hunters during the last ice age, 8,000 bce or so. according to a random google they were built between 3400 and 3200 bce. that's  quite a huge distance in time. according to the same source the people who put up these monuments were early farmers. it's like confusing ancient egypt with the reign of charlemaine.. martijn faassen 23:12, 23 nov 2004 (utc)

intro expansion request
i'd like to put this article on the main page, but the introduction could use some beefing up. also, someone else noted that the painting (the nightwatch) seems a bit arbitrary, and that a better painting (perhaps a painting of a historical event described in the article) would be better. →raul654 00:56, jan 29, 2005 (utc)
done. it think this nicely combines two erae in dutch history. junes 18:29, 7 feb 2005 (utc)

not completely living up to standards now
although this article is pretty good, and may have been good enough to be featured on wikipedia in the past, i don't think it's living up to wikipedia's current standards for featured articles. i mean, i have just added quite a considerable amount of additions and corrections, and i still feel like there's lots missing/wrong. for instance: the introduction is really odd, there is nothing about peoples coming in before the romans (batafs, westgoths, the like), the holy roman empire bit is rather short considering the timespan (+- 500-1500!) and important developments, there is next to nothing on the eighty years' war (yes, i know there's an article but there should be something in the main article as well), nothing about cultural life in the golden age (science, arts), oh and that part should probably be sectioned (subdivided, but not divided!) in eighty years' war and golden age. there is very little contemporary history and most of it is about institutions and the like (where are 'depillarization', 60's-70's cultural changes, immigration?), the balance is odd at times (quite a lot about indonesia compared to the rest), the language is rather poor sometimes and i agree with some comments that have been made about the images - there should probably be a different painting at the top (not sure what, though), and i feel there should be an image of william of orange (greatest dutchman, after all ;) ). don't worry, there's a lot that i like about the article (otherwise i wouldn't work on it), and hey, if we all work together we can give this article the smothering love that it needs :d. junes 18:50, 4 feb 2005 (utc) 
 okay, so i've corrected some of these shortcomings, specifically: added some germanic & roman history, expanded the eighty years' war bit, added contemporary history, improved on the language (but it still has sections that are a bit odd), and i've changed the top image. still to be done: expand holy roman empire, some more about science, arts, intellectualism during the golden age, insert an image of william of orange, adding good (and english!) 