deleted from the main page in reference to calling the use of hallucinogens for recreational use:

it is not really appropriate to name the use that way, but unfortunately many people do. it is not recommended to perceive this class of drugs as "recreational".

why not?  it may be your value judgement that using them for recreation is {unwise/sinful/not much fun anyway}, but to me at least, both the general public and medical professionals class drugs taken (whether wisely or not) for fun as recreational drug use, so why shouldn't we reflect that usage?  

additionally, we are not here to advocate or discourage drug use, per se.  our goal is to present as accurate and comprehensive information about drugs as we can.  if they cause your brain to rot, your sexual organs to drop off, and cause you to start voting for the eastern european contestants in the eurovision song contest, that should speak for itself. --robert merkel

i agree with that. however, we should care to the facts that:

1. only a minority of the general public as well as of medical professionals have personal experience with hallucinogens.

2. most other drugs taken for fun have tiny personal (non-medical) benefits expect of that fun. hallucinogens, however, can have a deep impact on ones personal life, even when taken only once.

3. these influences upon ones personal life are far less predictable than just a quality of a vanishing drug effect

so in sum, hallucinogens have high risks in exactly the recreational use, the often thoughtless use for a short fun, much more than other drugs used for that reason. on the other hand, fun certainly is not their highest benefit, because unlike most other classes of drugs their real value shows up long after their direct effect wear off. -- da

so make these points explicitly (though perhaps you should take care to seperate personal experience from consensus researched opinion).  i still don't see why we shouldn't call it recreational use - shooting up heroin, or petrol sniffing aren't exactly clever things to do, but that's what they are however ill-advised.

this text was at hallucinogens and should be integrated into this article:

an hallucinogen is a non-addictive narcotic substance that produce in humans altered sense-perceptions or states of consciousness.  there are a great variety of plants and fungi with hallucinogenic properties, as well as synthetic hallucinogens.  

almost all hallucinogens contain nitrogen and are classified as alkaloids; plant hallucinogens often have chemical structures similar to those of human hormones involved in brain biochemistry.  

as with all toxins, whether the effect is medicinal, narcotic, or poisonous depends on the dosage.

whether the use of hallucinogens is unregulated, regulated, or prohibited, and whether hallucinogens are used for recreational, medicinal, or spiritual purposes, varies from culture to culture.

among the most well-known hallucinogenic plants and fungi are:
 fly agaric (amanita muscaria)
 petyote (lophophora williamsii)
 deadly nightshade (atropa)
 henbane (hyoscyamus)
 mandrake (mandragora)
 marihuana (cannabis)
 ergot (claviceps)
 thorn apple (datora)
 iboga (tabernanthe)
 ayahuasca (banisteriopsis)
 floripondio (brugmansia)
 peyote (lophophora)
 various mushrooms (conocybe, panaeolus, psilocybe, stropharia)
 san pedro (trichocereus)
 badoh negro (ipomoea)
 ololiuqui (turbina)
 epená (virola)

see richard evans schultes and albert hoffman, plants of the gods