i am sorry for coming late to the discussion, but i must say that it seems an error to remain stuck with "hallucinogen" as a working term. it is pejorative, it is misleading, and worst of all, it feeds into drug war propaganda. it is as if we were trying to write a balanced article on same-sex love and decided that we had to use the terms "sodomy" and "sodomite."
--haiduc 22:57, 20 jun 2004 (utc)

ok, but the problems with entheogen and psychedelic are just as bad, if not worse. "hallucinogenic drug" is the term most commonly used in the closest thing there is to neutral publications on the subject, i.e. the scientific literature. this is usually even the case in scientific articles with apparently approving tones. what would you propose as an alternative? rkundalini 11:37, 21 jun 2004 (utc)

why do you say that those two options are just as bad?--haiduc 02:47, 24 jun 2004 (utc)

there is a bit of discussion in each of those entries as to why the terms have been criticized. basically, "entheogen" has not-necessarily-appropriate associations with god and religion, while "psychedelic", although originally fine, acquired a lot of irrelevant baggage and misuse in the 60s. personally i advocate reclaiming the use of the word psychedelic so i guess i would agree with you if you wanted to replace "hallucinogenic drug" with this term, but others may disagree due to the inappropriate meanings it has acquired. also, what about scopolamine-like things, dissociatives, salvia divinorum, and other hallucinogens that are arguably not psychedelics in the classic sense of the word? rkundalini 15:16, 25 jun 2004 (utc)

interesting, your take on "entheogen." as an atheist, i should have picked up on that a long time ago. frankly i do like "psychedelic," i like the etymology and i like the historical connotations. i also think that "psychoactive" and "psychotropic" are valid choices and can stand in as synonyms. "hallucinogen" on the other hand is both a misnomer and misleading, diverting the attention away from what is really a halluccination. as for the substances you have mentioned, i do not know enough about them to pass judgement, and i would encourage retaining the term for those substances whose effects do fall within that category. the true psychedelics do not, or, if they do, so do alcohol, cocaine and opium.--haiduc 02:24, 26 jun 2004 (utc) 

deleted from the main page in reference to calling the use of hallucinogens for recreational use:

it is not really appropriate to name the use that way, but unfortunately many people do. it is not recommended to perceive this class of drugs as "recreational".

why not?  it may be your value judgement that using them for recreation is {unwise/sinful/not much fun anyway}, but to me at least, both the general public and medical professionals class drugs taken (whether wisely or not) for fun as recreational drug use, so why shouldn't we reflect that usage?  

additionally, we are not here to advocate or discourage drug use, per se.  our goal is to present as accurate and comprehensive information about drugs as we can.  if they cause your brain to rot, your sexual organs to drop off, and cause you to start voting for the eastern european contestants in the eurovision song contest, that should speak for itself. --robert merkel

i agree with that. however, we should care to the facts that:

1. only a minority of the general public as well as of medical professionals have personal experience with hallucinogens.

2. most other drugs taken for fun have tiny personal (non-medical) benefits expect of that fun. hallucinogens, however, can have a deep impact on ones personal life, even when taken only once.

3. these influences upon ones personal life are far less predictable than just a quality of a vanishing drug effect

so in sum, hallucinogens have high risks in exactly the recreational use, the often thoughtless use for a short fun, much more than other drugs used for that reason. on the other hand, fun certainly is not their highest benefit, because unlike most other classes of drugs their real value shows up long after their direct effect wear off. -- da

so make these points explicitly (though perhaps you should take care to seperate personal experience from consensus researched opinion).  i still don't see why we shouldn't call it recreational use - shooting up heroin, or petrol sniffing aren't exactly clever things to do, but that's what they are however ill-advised.

this text was at hallucinogens and should be integrated into this article:

an hallucinogen is a non-addictive narcotic substance that produce in humans altered sense-perceptions or states of consciousness.  there are a great variety of plants and fungi with hallucinogenic properties, as well as synthetic hallucinogens.  

almost all hallucinogens contain nitrogen and are classified as alkaloids; plant hallucinogens often have chemical structures similar to those of human hormones involved in brain biochemistry.  

as with all toxins, whether the effect is medicinal, narcotic, or poisonous depends on the dosage.

whether the use of hallucinogens is unregulated, regulated, or prohibited, and whether hallucinogens are used for recreational, medicinal, or spiritual purposes, varies from culture to culture.

among the most well-known hallucinogenic plants and fungi are:
 fly agaric (amanita muscaria)
 petyote (lophophora williamsii)
 deadly nightshade (atropa)
 henbane (hyoscyamus)
 mandrake (mandragora)
 marihuana (cannabis)
 ergot (claviceps)
 thorn apple (datora)
 iboga (tabernanthe)
 ayahuasca (banisteriopsis)
 floripondio (brugmansia)
 peyote (lophophora)
 various mushrooms (conocybe, panaeolus, psilocybe, stropharia)
 san pedro (trichocereus)
 badoh negro (ipomoea)
 ololiuqui (turbina)
 epená (virola)

see richard evans schultes and albert hoffman, plants of the gods

removed (most of) the following: 

dxm

the above is in error. dxm is in fact a psychedelic:

http://www.dextromethorphan.ws

the reference is pretty much just a page full of links itself, so it would be helpful if a proper link were provided. and even if it is a psychedelic by some standards, it might be nice to stay consistently with lewin, assuming s/he's an established standard. -- johnowens 21:35 mar 26, 2003 (utc)

i have added quite a bit of background, while trying to maintain material already present. the material on native american use and historical european use  has been moved to the entheogen entry (except where it was duplicating material already there). i also changed a few instances of the word "chemical" to "substance", since the former is usually taken to mean a synthetic compound, whereas many hallucinogenic drugs are actually natural products containing a mixture of active compounds. rkundalini 15:35, 18 may 2004 (utc)

i have changed the title back, as there were non-military uses discussed in that section (e.g. psychiatry). meelar 17:44, 9 jun 2004 (utc)

good point - i didn't spot that. sir trollsalot 19:05, 9 jun 2004 (utc)

i have added back the "activity questioned" to the last list of "others".

myristicin and elemicin, from nutmeg: while these are often mentioned as hallucinogenics i'm not aware of any reliable firsthand experiences showing real hallucinogenic activity, at least not more than from any other volatile oil (e.g. dry mouth, slight stimulation).

cryogenine/vertine, the active constituent of sinicuichi: this is heimia salicifolia. i remember an article in j. psychoactive drugs (?, many years ago) that this is only a coumarin containing flavor in alcoholic brews.

ergine, from morning glory and hawaian baby woodrose seeds: all these are more depressants than hallucinogens, not comparable to lsd.
--cacycle 21:42, 7 jul 2004 (utc)