the supporters of william of orange were not known as orangemen, as far as i know. i don't think that
term would have come into usage until the founding of the orange order, in 1795.

i am not deleting any of this, even though most of it violates npov. that doesn't bother me so much as the extraordinary lack of knowledge on display. for suggestions, it would be good to note that hillbillies as a term is no longer perjorative, "hillbillies" can be found in texas, arkansas, southern indiana etc. historically, in appalachia, the role of (king) coal and mining towns cannot be overlooked. and of course, junior johnson, dolly parton and a host of others hailing from appalachia, who have so greatly enriched modern culture, should certainly be discussed here, in context.

i'm not going to defend my writing in this case as expert, but lets look at a few things. most people still consider hillbilly to be an insult. just because alcohol is illegal, doesn't make it nonexistent. the reason that its production was popular in the mountains was exactly because it was so isolated. 

i never said non-existent. just off the top of my head i could give precise directions to the remains of a still in scott's gulf, white county, tennessee, walk you right there. (from crossville, take a left on stringtown road, drive to the gravel road on the right leading to virgin falls, continue on this road past virgin falls to the edge of the cumberland plateau, call me on your cell phone from there... i will walk you in...:) the issue was occurrence and motivation. 

i tended to focus on the extreme examples, but that is what is interesting to me. it probably is more folkloric than factual. if you hate it so much, then fix it or remove the parts you think are false. you have demonstrated some personal knowledge, so lets see it. 

relax. this will be as hard to write as white trash, but there is no particular hurry. couple of things need to be done: most of our discussion needs to move to a talk page, where anyone interested can hammer out the details. quite a bit of what you wrote could be resurrected as popular folklore associated with hillbillies. the main subject matter needs to wikied to appalachian folk life and customs, etc. and there surely must be links to li'l abner and snuffy smith. 

oh, and another thing. who said the article was done? write about the damn coal mines and dolly parton. 

slow down! stop ranting! presenting what you wrote as "folklore associated with hillbillies" or some such thing sounds like a great idea. it would much more accurate, and would help flesh out a better article. dolly parton and king coal deserve (long) first class articles, but both subjects will difficult and time consuming to write. 

i'm sorry, the quality of my judgement in writing tends to wax and wane. i was already mad about a particular argument in osama bin laden, so i flipped out. please accept my apologies.

no problem.  i pledge to _not_ use the word "ridiculous" to characterize an argument anymore.  :)  i did do some work on dolly's page...

i think i have an old national geographic (one of many hundreds i now own i'm afraid) that details appalachian life in the 1960's, and my old college had a book on appalachian english "dialects" so maybe i'll dredge up some unique info after all.
--alan d. (not sjc)

could someone please expand, about hillbilly culture, it's image in american culture, etc? especially for us non-american readers. thanks.

"hillbilly" is a pejorative applied to appalachian americans, generally.  its origins are with the migration of scots and irish and germans to the appalachian lands in the early 19th century.  essentially, settlement in the southeastern united states followed the forced expulsion of the american indians, so the first settlers were along the coast ("piedmont"), then in the uplands, and then the mountains.  thus, the coastal folks regarded the uplanders as newcomers, as poor, and as uncouth.  they, in turn, regarded the mountain people as poor, uncouth, and ignorant.  to some degree, this is anti-immigrant hostility.  however, each wave of english language settlers also brought with it a later version of british english that was preserved as an isolate and/or a different regional selection of british english.  people in eastern north carolina, eastern south carolina, and southern georgia speak a different dialect from those in w. nc, w. sc, n. ga, and all of alabama.  both of these speak yet a different dialect from those living in the appalachain mountains.  when both of the first two waves of immigrants had grown prosperous (cotton, first, transportation and tobacco for the second group), the hill folks were still poor.  they remained poor (terrible land for farming) and isolated into the 2nd half of the 20th century.  when these people came down into the metropolitain areas of, for example, atlanta, columbia, or raleigh, they spoke "funny," had "funny" vocabulary, and were exploited as cheap labor.  they were derided as "hillbillies."  some adopted the term themselves (as, of course, some irish would call themselves "micks," some italians "wops," some african americans "nigger") and attempted to redefine it as a point of pride (e.g. some types of country music will boast of being "hillbilly").  the dialect has recently been spreading (as the mid-georgia/w. sc/w. nc dialect had, earlier) as prosperity is reaching the edges of this region.  the price is, of course, that there is less and less "hillbilly" culture, because part of the spread is prosperity and travel, and those things are the negation of some of what was "hillbilly" characteristic.  (now, also, there is less "hillbilly" and more regional identification, as, for example, in west virginia and western virginia, where the group identifier is much less "hillbilly" than "coal folks" and "hill folks.")  geogre 01:30, 26 december 2005 (utc)
oh, and let me add to that something i had forgotten.  people from the appalachains themselves migrated, and the same group that settled there settled other places.  hence, in the ozark mountains in arkansas you also have "hillbillies," as these "arkies" would later, during the dust bowl, migrate (along with the okies) to california and oregon and get called hillbillies by other economic migrants.  those ozarks settlers were the same scots and germans as had moved to the appalachains.  generally, the term is a term of abuse, and it's applied when folks leave the mountains and come in contact with other, lowland folks.  the name of the dialect is, by the way, hillspar.  there are two versions of it, at least.  (the west virginia coal country mountain dialect is different from the e. tennessee and n. georgia dialect, and both of these are different from the arkansas ozarks dialect (although it is much closer to the tn and ga version).)  geogre 12:36, 26 december 2005 (utc)
clean up
hell everyone, i have gone over this article a bit. it still needs significant cleanup, expansion, fact checking, spellchecking, copy-editing, wikifying, etc, etc... but i think it has great potential. let's see if we can make it a feature article. -- firstprinciples 13:27, feb 8, 2005 (utc)

also guys, remember to sign your talk page posts with four tildes (~~~~) so we can keep track of who's commenting ;) -- firstprinciples 13:29, feb 8, 2005 (utc)

 could this term have orginated out of the feuds between highlander lowlander scots? 

could this term have orginated out of the feuds between highlander lowlander scots?

 yokel 

it is a bit odd that "yokel" redirects here, but its etymology is not explained. -- beland 21:52, 18 december 2005 (utc)

on removing :image:cletus.gif and accusations of vandalism
i note the uncivil edit summary with which fred chessplayer's removal of :image:cletus.gif was reverted by user:abelson. abelson, please refrain from referring to obviously good-faith edits as "vandalism". that is considered a personal attack. "rtft" is rude and uncouth and notably uncalled for, considering that the "fucking tag" on the image description page supports fred's action, not yours.  it says: ...  it is believed that the use of this photograph to illustrate the person, product, or event in question, in the absence of a free alternative... qualifies as fair use under united states copyright law. other use of this image, on wikipedia or elsewhere, may be copyright infringement.". bolding in original. that would mean the image is fair use in an article about the simpsons, not anywhere else. cletus is a simpsons character, not a generalized hillbilly. i have removed the image again, please don't put it back.  thank you. bishonen | talk 19:21, 25 december 2005 (utc)