this article is about sexual practices (i.e., physical sex). broader aspects of sexual behaviour such as social and psychological sexual issues are covered in related articles such as human sexuality, heterosexuality, and homosexuality. 

aspects of human sexual behavior
 sexual relationships 
opinions and norms vary on whether an emotional bond of a certain intensity and durability should be a prerequisite for sex.

 cultural aspects 
as with other behaviors, human intelligence and complex societies have produced among the most complicated sexual behaviors of any animal. most people experiment with a range of sexual activities during their lives, though they tend to engage in only a few of these regularly. most people enjoy some sexual activities. however, most societies have defined some sexual activities as inappropriate (wrong person, wrong activity, wrong place, wrong time, etc.) some people enjoy many different sexual activities, while others avoid sexual activities altogether for religious or other reasons (see chastity, sexual abstinence). historically, some societies and religions have viewed sex as appropriate only within marriage.

 social norms and rules 

human sexual behavior, like many other kinds of activity engaged in by human beings, is generally governed by social rules that are culturally specific and vary widely.  these social rules are referred to as sexual morality (what can and can not be done by society's rules) and sexual norms (what is and is not expected).  sexual ethics, morals, and norms relate to issues including deception/honesty, legality, fidelity and consent.

some activities, known as sex crimes, are illegal in some jurisdictions, including those conducted between (or among) consenting and competent adults (examples include sodomy law and adult-adult incest).  scientific studies suggest sexual fantasy, even of unusual interests, is usually a healthy activity.
 
some people engage in various sexual activities as a business transaction. when this involves having sex with, or performing certain actual sexual acts for another person, it is called prostitution. other aspects of the adult industry include (for example) telephone sex operators, strip clubs, pornography and the like.

nearly all developed societies consider it a serious crime to force someone to engage in sexual behavior or to engage in sexual behavior with someone who does not consent. this is called sexual assault, and if sexual penetration occurs it is called rape, the most serious kind of sexual assault. the details of this distinction may vary among different legal jurisdictions. also, precisely what constitutes effective consent to have sex varies from culture to culture and is frequently debated. laws regulating the minimum age at which a person can consent to have sex (age of consent) are frequently the subject of political and moral debate, as is adolescent sexual behavior in general.

it is possible to engage in sexual activity without a partner, primarily through masturbation and/or sexual fantasy.

 sexual relationships 

a key sexual behavior throughout the entire animal kingdom is the seeking of a sex partner.  humans are no exception to this rule.  a sexual encounter can be the result of the sending signals indicating readiness for sex, and being receptive to reciprocal signals.  or, it might be the result of years of planning, through the use of cultural rituals such as courtship and marriage.

common methods:

 personal choice - a person chooses for themselves their own partner, according to their own wishes
 status based roles - a high status person in some cultures may choose partners backed by the force of social custom, and low status persons have little or no choice or expectation of avoiding the same. (for example, some employer-employee liaisons, and droit de seigneur)
 mutual trade - prostitution ("mutual trade" would mean that money is traded for the use of another's flesh.)

additionally, the pool of available and acceptable candidates may be limited, to one's own town, own religion, similar status, tactically advantageous (e.g., to cement social bonds or make peace), and so on.

 the search for a partner 
 locating and identifying potential partners 
industries enabling sex or sexual communication include nightclubs, singles bars, personal want ads (in newspapers and on the web), dating services, and brothels, among many others.  many organizations and clubs sponsor events that bring people with similar interests together.  religious and family connections provide another way for people to meet.

 the encounter between potential partners 
once a person has located another person with whom they desire to have sex, the first thing usually done is to introduce themselves or position themselves in such a way that he or she will introduce himself or herself, or to non-verbally demonstrate their sexual availability and interest to the person in question. this is usually not simple, and can be quite awkward.

 potential problems 
 the fear of rejection 
the fear of rejection is common when trying to befriend a potential partner. if the participants are both sensitive to the other's signals, then they can detect quickly whether their sexual objectives are mutual. however, misreading another person's signals is a common occurrence, and can lead to misunderstandings/disappointment, and as such, this is a huge detractor in the stakes of relationships, and so many relationships are consigned to fantasies based on this fear. it is worth noting that some people consume alcohol, sometimes to excess, in order to "smooth things down," i.e, overcome this fear. if they discover soon enough that their objectives are at odds with one another, then a conversation can end before either one loses face, and then each person can seek others with whom to communicate. on the other hand, if the communication results in an escalating sense of intimacy for both participants, then a degree of trust is established that mitigates the fear of rejection.

safety and ancillary issues
there are four main areas of risk in sexual activity, namely:
 choosing to trust a partner who is physically at risk
 sexually transmitted disease
 unwanted pregnancy
 seeking or engaging in an activity which is legally or culturally disapproved

these risks are raised by any condition (temporary or permanent) which impairs one's judgement, such as excess alcohol or drugs, or emotional states such as loneliness, depression or euphoria (e.g. new students at college). carefully considered activity can greatly reduce all of these issues.

 sexually transmitted disease 
sexual behaviors that involve contact with another person or the bodily fluids of another person entail some risk of transmission of sexually transmitted disease. these techniques are generally seen as less necessary for those in committed fidelitous monogamous or polyamorous relationships with persons who have been demonstrated to be free of disease; see fluid bonding.

due to health concerns arising from hiv/aids, chlamydia, syphilis, gonorrhea, hpv and other sexually transmitted infections, some people may want potential sex partners to be tested for stds before engaging in sex.

unwanted pregnancy
sexual behaviors that involve the contact of semen with the vagina or vulva may result in pregnancy.  to prevent pregnancy, many people employ a variety of birth control measures. the most popular methods of prevention are condoms, spermicides, hormonal contraception, and sterilization. some experts also suggest that in the face of such preventive measures, there maybe no need to carry on current prohibitions on incestuous relations in modern societies as far as these can be observed strictly leading to removal of fear of pregnancy with close relatives like mother or sister in case of males and father or brother with females.

 judgment impairment 
recreational drugs are often used in social settings in the belief that they enhance interpersonal communication.  some common recreational drugs are alcohol, cannabis, caffeine and nicotine.  

 alcohol is sometimes called a "social lubricant" because it reduces inhibitions, including those caused by the fear of rejection.  at the same time, though, alcohol impairs judgment, making a person less receptive to subtle signals, which can result in less effective communication. more importantly, this judgment impairment can lead to poor decision-making regarding sex, such as engaging in unsafe sex. inhibition of emotions like aggression is also impaired, and prolonged use/withdrawal might lead to paranoid delusions (see othello syndrome)
 cannabis can induce increased appreciation for humour and art, which might improve communication.  but at the same time, it can cause one to become introspective, and thus less inclined to communicate. 
 caffeine and nicotine are stimulants. others include amphetamines and cocaine. stimulants can increase alertness and improve attention, which can improve one's ability to communicate effectively. but at the same time, time-perspective of planned actions shortens, proportionately to the amount of artificial stimulation applied. also impaired judgment applies to spheres related with either stamina  (amphetamines) or anxiety/fear (caffeine/amphetamine) which may lead to performing risky behaviours, like unprotected sex, show-off during mating , etc, or exhaustive behavior like sex marathons. inhibition of aggression is also impaired. prolonged use of stimulants may also lead to developing of paranoia, especially among individuals susceptible to brief reactive psychosis. 

use of recreational drugs is frequently cited as a risk factor for health problems including sexually transmitted diseases, addiction, birth defects, heart disease, cancer and liver disease, among others.http://dancesafe.org/documents/druginfo/risk.php

most psychoactive drugs which influence the sexual and communication spheres of human behavior interact with the neuroendocrine system, and can also influence levels of hormones and neurohormones responsible for instinct behavior, lactation, etc. see psychiatry and endocrinology for more details.

legal issues related to sexual behavior

sodomy and same sex laws
various forms of same-sex sexual activity have been prohibited under law in many areas at different times in history. in 2003, the lawrence v texas united states supreme court decision (aided by krawczyk v alabama) overturned all such laws in the us.http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/02-102.zs.html

usually, though not always, such laws are termed sodomy laws, but also include issues such as age of consent laws, "decency" laws, and so forth. laws prohibiting same-sex sexuality have varied widely throughout history, varying by culture, religious and social taboos and customs, etc. often such laws are targeted or applied differently based on sex as well. for example, laws against same-sex sexual behavior in england during the reign of queen victoria, sodomy or "buggery" laws were aimed specifically at male same-sex sexual activity and did not target or even address female homosexuality. a well known example of such laws applied in modern times can be found in alan turing.

child sexual abuse

 list of sex acts and practices 
there are many variations of sexual activities, and often multiple names for any given practice. for more detail see the comprehensive list of sex positions and list of sexual slang.''

general

barebacking
erotic massage
erotica
group sex
sex toy
cunnilingus
fellatio
anilingus
sexual fantasy
masturbation 

oral sex
oral stimulation of nipples
sexual intercourse
anal intercourse
intercrural sex
outercourse
pornography
roleplay
sex positions
foreplay

specialized bdsm and paraphilia related
generally less common, but still widespread, are the various paraphilias. some of the more common ones are:
 bdsm
bondage
list of bondage positions
domination and submission
sadism and masochism
 sexual masochism is the recurrent urge or behavior of wanting to be humiliated, beaten, bound, or otherwise made to suffer.
 sexual sadism is the recurrent urge or behavior involving acts in which the pain or humiliation of the victim is sexually exciting. 
impact play
 fetishism is the use of non-sexual or nonliving objects to gain sexual excitement.
foot fetishism
leather fetishism
latex and pvc fetishism
 nyotaimori
 pedophilia is the sexual attraction to prepubescent children.
 wax play
 zoophilia, the attraction to other species as partners.

specialized verbal or visual activities
some forms of sexual activity involve someone else, but not touching the other:
 dirty talk
phone sex
cybersex
 exhibitionism is the recurrent urge or behavior to expose one's genitals to an unsuspecting person.
 voyeurism is the recurrent urge or behavior to observe an unsuspecting person who is naked, disrobing or engaging in sexual activities.

