hedwig () is a german female given name, which originates from old high german hadwig,  haduwig (hadu meaning "battle", and wig meaning "fight)". other forms are:-
 english diminutive: hedy
 french: edwige
 italian: edvige
 portuguese, spanish, catalan: eduviges
 latinized version: eduviges, eduvigis
 dutch: hadewych
 danish, norwegian, swedish, icelandic: hedvig
 polish: jadwiga (diminutives: iga, jadzia)
 lithuanian: jadvyga
 czech, slovene: hedvika
 slovak: hedviga
 russian: ядвига (jadwiga)

hedwig may refer to:

in religion
saint hedwig of andechs (1174–1243), duchess of silesia, canonized 1267
saint hedwig (jadwiga) (1373–1399), queen of poland, canonized 1997. daughter of the king louis i of hungary.
st. hedwig cemetery (disambiguation)
st. hedwig's cathedral, berlin
st. hedwig, texas
st. hedwig's (milwaukee)
st. hedwig's in chicago
st. hedwig's in detroit

other nobility
hedwig of france (970-1013), countess of mons
hedwige of saxony (910-965), german noblewoman and mother of hugh capet, king of france
hedwig of kalisz (1266–1339), wife of the king władysław i the elbow-high and mother of casimir iii of poland and elisabeth of poland. hedwig was daughter of the duke bolesław the pious and the hungarian princess blessed jolenta.
hedwig jagiellon (1457–1502), daughter of the king casimir iv jagiellon of poland and elisabeth habsburg of hungary. hedwig was wife of duke george of bavaria
hedwig jagiellon (1513–1573), daughter of sigismund i the old of poland and his first wife the hungarian countess barbara zápolya. hedwig married joachim ii hector, elector of brandenburg
hedwig of nordgau (c.922-c.993), wife of siegfried of luxembourg, first count of luxembourg.

in literature, stage and screen
hedvig is a main character in henrik ibsen's play the wild duck.
hedwig (harry potter), harry potter's faithful messenger and pet snowy owl in the harry potter novels by j. k. rowling
hedwig and the angry inch (musical), off-broadway musical about a fictional rock and roll band
hedwig and the angry inch (film), film based on the musical
hedy lamarr, austrian-born american actress
hedvig raa-winterhjelm, scandinavian actress
eduige is a character in the opera rodelinda by george frederick handel.
hedviga is a character in the opera guglielmo tell by gioacchino rossini.

other
hedwig village, texas, city in harris county, texas, united states
johann hedwig, german botanist
hedwig glass, type of glass of uncertain origin dating from some time in the 10th-12th centuries ad
hedwig, code name of red hat linux version 6.0 released april 19, 1999. desktop engineering, readers' choice award, 1999; wired for 3d, 1999 editor's choice award winner

