for the ethiopian tribe of this name, see hammer people.

hamar is a town and municipality in the county of hedmark, norway.

hamar is located on the shores of mjøsa, norway's largest lake, and is the principal city of the hedmark county. it is bordered to the northwest by ringsaker, to the north by åmot, to the east by løten, and on the south by stange.

history
between 500 ad and 1000 ad, the farm aker was probably one of the most important power centres in norway, located just a few kilometres outside today's hamar.
 
after the christianization of norway in 1030, hamar began to gain influence as a centre for trade and religion, until the episcopal representative nikolaus breakspear in 1152 founded hamar kaupangen as one of five dioceses in medieval norway, which embraced hedemarken and christians amt, and was formed in 1152 out of that of oslo, when arnold, bishop of gardar, greenland (1124-52), was appointed first bishop of hamar. he began to build the now ruined cathedral of christ church, which was completed about the time of bishop paul (1232-52). bishop thorfinn (1278-82) was exiled and died at ter doest abbey in flanders. bishop jörund (1285-86) was transferred to trondhjem. a provincial council was held in 1380. hamar remained an important religious and political centre in norway, organized around the cathedral and the bishop's manor until the reformation in 1536, when it lost its status as a bishopric after the last catholic bishop, mogens (1513-37), was taken prisoner in his castle at hamar by truid ulfstand, a danish noble, and sent to antvorskov in denmark, where he was mildly treated until his death in 1542. there were at hamar a cathedral chapter with ten canons, a school, a dominican priory of st. olaf and a monastery of the canons regular of st. anthony of vienne. 
 
the hamar cathedral and manor were destroyed in the northern seven years' war with sweden in 1567, and in 1568 the market was disbanded, under pressure from citizens of oslo. since then, hamar gradually lost its importance as a trading centre. the site of the medieval town fell into disrepair and was taken over by a farm.
((hamar in norway,  

the modern city
the modern city of hamar was founded a kilometer or so south of the medieval city in 1849 by king oscar as a trading center.

the hedmark museum, located on domkirkeodden is an important historical landmark in hamar, an out-door museum with remains of the medieval church, in a protective glass housing, the episcopal fortress, and a collection of old farm houses.  the museum is a combined medieval, ethnological and archaeological museum and has received architectural prizes for its approach to conservation and exhibition.  it also houses a vast photographic archive for the hedmark region.

hamar is also known for its indoor speed skating arena, the olympia hall, better known as vikingskipet ("the viking ship") for its shape. it was built to host the speed skating competitions of the 1994 winter olympics that were held in nearby lillehammer.

the centre of hamar is the pedestrian walkway in the middle of town, with the library, cinema and farmer's market on stortorget (the big square) on the western side, and østre torg (the eastern square), which sits on top of an underground multi-story carpark, on the eastern side.

hamar is an important railway junction between two different lines to trondheim. rørosbanen, the old railway line, branches off from the mainline dovrebanen. the norwegian national railway museum (norsk jernbanemuseum) is also situated in hamar.

famous residents
rut brandt, writer (1920 - 1986)
sigurd evensmo, author (1912-1978)
kirsten flagstad, opera singer (1895-1962)
katti anker møller, civil rights activist (1868-1945)
even wetten, speed skater (1982-)
petter vaagan moen, footballer (1984-)
rolf jacobsen, poet (1907-1994)

sister cities
hamar has several sister cities, both in scandinavia and around the world:
lund, sweden
viborg, denmark
dalvík, iceland
borgå, finland
greifswald, germany
khan younis, palestine
fargo, north dakota, united states
karmiel, israel

sources
 

