nl:hate speech pl:hate speech
hate speech is a controversial term used to describe spoken or printed expressions deemed to arise from, or to incite, hatred or contempt towards some group of people, such as an ethnic or religious group or sexual minority. it is not a legal or statutory term (as is, for instance, "obscenity"), though it has been written into the bylaws of some governmental institutions such as public universities (see below).

those who use the term "hate speech" do so in protest against ideas or expressions they believe are destructive to the public good or to the good of a group deserving protection. they draw a link between hateful or prejudiced speech and discriminatory conduct, or the creation of a biased or harassing environment. those who object to the term hold it to be inextricably connected with calls for the censorship of unpopular viewpoints, and also to be irrationally dismissory, in that to label an expression "hate speech" is to call for it to be dismissed out of hand without being evaluated further.

in the united states, the disagreement over the term is often stereotyped as rancor between "liberals" and "conservatives" -- with liberals seeking protection for oppressed groups, and conservatives holding out for an absolute form of freedom of speech. this is a simplistic view, however, as many self-described liberals oppose the restriction of speech in the name of nondiscrimination, and many conservatives have called for the restriction of speech against particular (usually religious) groups. the traditional political spectrum is a poor model for this issue, as with many others.

hate speech codes in academia

some american universities have speech codes that prohibit hate speech. these rules are intended to ensure an atmosphere free from harassment and intimidation, conducive to a learning environment. many speakers have opposed such speech codes, claiming they constitute a new orthodoxy of political correctness and represent an erosion of the freedom of speech guaranteed in the first amendment to the united states constitution, which strictly speaking only prohibits government censorship.  freedom of speech, however, is a widely held value beyond the governmental sphere and many universities are government institutions and almost all accept government funds.

some observers believe that the accusation of hate speech is often made to suppress points of view which are unfavorable to certain "protected groups", which represents a significant infringement of the tradition of academic freedom and gives members of these groups an unfair advantage in the marketplace of ideas.

for example, for a college professor to say, "lesbians should not be schoolteachers", could be considered hate speech. the professor could be denied tenure, even if he were expressing his religious belief that people who engage in lesbian behavior should not be put in positions where they can influence young people. the defense that he doesn't hate lesbians and didn't intend to hurt anyone's feelings might be dismissed on the grounds that to object to certain behavior or have one's livelihood threatened is harmful on its face.  

 example of hate speech 

the slogan "aids kills fags dead" has been used in the united states by groups and individuals extremely opposed to homosexuality. it was for instance seen in 1998 at the funeral of matthew shepard, a victim of anti-gay violence, when a group led by fred phelps of the westboro baptist church staged a protest.

presumably, people who seriously use this slogan believe that the misfortunes of others can and should be interpreted as punishment from god.

the slogan apparently appeared for the first time in public in the early 1990s, when sebastian bach, lead singer of the heavy metal band skid row, wore it on a t-shirt. some sources say this happened during a concert, others claim it was in a magazine photo shoot. at first, mr bach joked about it on mtv, but he later apologized, claiming that he had many gay friends. his website http://www.sebastianbach.com does not mention the incident.

the phrase is a parody on the trademarked slogan "raid kills bugs dead", used to advertise an  insecticide by s.c. johnson & sons; see http://www.killsbugsdead.com/ .

