politics of indonesia takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic, whereby the president of indonesia is both head of state and head of government, and of a multi-party system. executive power is exercised by the government. legislative power is vested in both the government and the two people's representative councils. the judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.
the 1945 constitution provided for a limited separation of executive, legislative, and judicial power. the governmental system has been described as "presidential with parliamentary characteristics."king, blair. a inside indonesia:constitutional tinkering: the search for consensus is taking time access date 2009-05-23 following the indonesian riots of may 1998 and the resignation of president suharto, several political reforms were set in motion via amendments to the constitution of indonesia, which resulted in changes to all branches of government.
reform process
thumb|left|300px|map showing the parties/organisations with the largest vote share per province in indonesia's elections from 1971 to 2004.

a constitutional reform process lasted from 1999 to 2002, with four constitutional amendments producing important changes.denny indrayana (2008), pp. 360-361

among these are term limits of up to two five-year terms for the president and vice president, and measures to institute checks and balances. the highest state institution is the people's consultative assembly (mpr), whose functions previously included electing the president and vice president (since 2004 the president has been elected directly by the people), establishing broad guidelines of state policy, and amending the constitution. the 695-member mpr includes all 550 members of the people's representative council (dpr) (the house of representatives) plus 130 "regional representatives" elected by the twenty-six provincial parliaments and sixty-five appointed members from societal groupsdenny indrayana (2008), pp. 361-362

the dpr, which is the premier legislative institution, originally included 462 members elected through a mixed proportional/district representational system and thirty-eight appointed members of the armed forces (tni) and police (polri). tni/polri representation in the dpr and mpr ended in 2004. societal group representation in the mpr was eliminated in 2004 through further constitutional change.denny indrayana (2008), pp. 293-296

having served as rubberstamp bodies in the past, the dpr and mpr have gained considerable power and are increasingly assertive in oversight of the executive branch. under constitutional changes in 2004, the mpr became a bicameral legislature, with the creation of the dewan perwakilan daerah (dpd), in which each province is represented by four members, although its legislative powers are more limited than those of the dpr. through his appointed cabinet, the president retains the authority to conduct the administration of the government.denny indrayana (2008), pp. 265, 361, 441

a general election in june 1999 produced the first freely elected national, provincial, and regional parliaments in over forty years. in october 1999 the mpr elected a compromise candidate, abdurrahman wahid, as the country's fourth president, and megawati sukarnoputri — a daughter of sukarno, the country's first president — as the vice president. megawati's pdi-p party had won the largest share of the vote (34%) in the general election, while golkar, the dominant party during the soeharto era, came in second (22%). several other, mostly islamic parties won shares large enough to be seated in the dpr. further democratic elections took place in 2004 and 2009.
laft|350px|thumb|the indonesian political system before and after the constitutional amendments

executive branch

|president
|susilo bambang yudhoyono
|dpd
|20 october 2004
|-
|vice-president
|boediono
|non-party
|20 october 2009
|}
the president and vice president are selected by vote of the citizens for five-year terms. prior to 2004, they were chosen by people's consultative assembly. the last election was held 8 july 2009. the president heads the united indonesia cabinet (kabinet indonesia bersatu)
the president of indonesia is directly elected for a maximum of two five-year terms, and is the head of state, commander-in-chief of indonesian armed forces and responsible for domestic governance and policy-making and foreign affairs. the president appoints a cabinet, who do not have to be elected members of the legislature.denny indrayana (2008), pp. 361, 443, 440

legislative branch

left|250px|thumb|the legislative building complex
the people's consultative assembly (, mpr) is the legislative branch in indonesia's political system. following elections in 2004, the mpr became a bicameral parliament, with the creation of the dpd as its second chamber in an effort to increase regional representation.denny indrayana (2008), pp. 264-265, 367 the regional representatives council (, dpd) is the upper house of the people's consultative assembly. the lower house is the people's representative council (, dpr), sometimes referred to as the house of representatives, which has 550 members, elected for a five year term by proportional representation in multi-member constituencies.

political parties and elections

the general election committee  (, kpu ) is the body responsible for running both parliamentary and presidential elections in indonesia. 
prior to the general election of 2004, the kpu was made up of members who were also members of political parties, however members of the kpu must now be non-partisan.

judicial branch
the indonesian supreme court () is the highest level of the judicial branch. its judges are appointed by the president. the constitutional court rules on constitutional and political matters (), while a judicial commission () oversees the judges.denny indrayana (2008), p266 - 267

foreign relations

during the regime of president suharto, indonesia built strong relations with the united states and had difficult relations with the people's republic of china owing to indonesia's anti-communist policies and domestic tensions with the chinese community. it received international denunciation for its annexation of east timor in 1978. indonesia is a founding member of the association of south east asian nations, and thereby a member of both asean+3 and the east asia summit. since the 1980s, indonesia has worked to develop close political and economic ties between south east asian nations, and is also influential in the organisation of islamic cooperation. indonesia was heavily criticized between 1975 and 1999 for allegedly suppressing human rights in east timor, and for supporting violence against the east timorese following the latter's secession and independence in 1999. since 2001, the government of indonesia has co-operated with the u.s. in cracking down on islamic fundamentalism and terrorist groups.

