'homo' is latin for man, but where does the use of 'homo' as 'the same' come from (i.e. homozygous, homosexual, homogenous, etc)?--blackgriffen 

a quick web search suggests that the second usage is from greek.

yes. greek homos is cognate with english same. it's unrelated to latin homo. --zundark, 2001 dec 16

i doubt that the latin "homo" is unrelated. consider that men formulated the language. one way to refer to other men is "the same [as myself]". just speculation, though.--blackgriffen
 not sure about whether men formulated the language.  som,etimes i think that without women, we men would still be grunting and pointing.:) men may have written the language more in the past, but we certainly didnt invent it. --mishac 07:27, 20 feb 2004 (utc)

latin homo is apparently related to humus ("ground" or "earth"),
so the meaning is something like "creature of the earth".
the latin words from the same indo-european source as greek homos and english same are things like simul and similis.
--zundark, 2001 dec 16

latin (language) redirects to latin, so might as well use the latin link

homo (genus) links to an article that mentions 7 'homo' species, not only homo sapiens sapiens and homo neanderthalensis. just follow the link and read all about them. in this disamb page it is irrelevant to name only the two.
also, the link neanderthal strangely leads to an article about the homo neanderthalensis, not to an article about the neanderthal (valley of the neander river) in germany, while the link homo neanderthalensis redirects to the same neanderthal article - this is very confusing.

 homo 
you think that's confusing, take a look at the spelling homo, that i just added. this is not a joke (though i think it's kind of funny, and so did the swedish media). please follow the external link i provided, if you don't believe me. i've never edited a disambiguation page before, so please excuse me if anything's inappropriate. i'm thinking of doing a short article on homo for this page to link to, and then the text here can be a lot shorter.bishonen 18:02, 9 aug 2004 (utc)

i think you did just fine. it would be a good idea to create an article for it, though, then reduce the text in the disambig. - uthersrg 18:20, 9 aug 2004 (utc)

yeah, "homo" means mainly homosexual, in swedish, as well in english. that homo example is quite funny!

thanks, uthersrg. done. :-) bishonen 22:02, 9 aug 2004 (utc)

 editprotected 

i just want to add that its offensive in canada, too; likely, its offensive else where but i just live in canada....so.

thanks

68.148.165.213 19:14, 24 july 2006 (utc)

 already done. —ruud 19:35, 24 july 2006 (utc)