hesychasm (from greek hσυχασμoς, meaning quietness ) is a mystical tradition of experiential prayer in eastern orthodox christianity.  it is described in great detail in the philokalia, a compilation of what various eastern orthodox saints wrote about prayer.

the hesychastic prayer
in practice, the hesychastic prayer bears some superficial resemblance to mystical prayer or meditation in eastern religions (buddhism, hinduism, compare with yoga), although this similarity is often overly emphasized in popular accounts.

for example, it may involve specific body postures, and be accompanied by very deliberate breathing patterns. it involves acquiring an inner stillness, ignoring the physical senses. the hesychasts interpreted christ's injunction in the gospel of matthew to "go into your closet to pray", to mean that they should ignore sensory input and withdraw inwards to pray. 
the highest goal of the hesychasts was the vision of the divine light.
in solitude and retirement the hesychast had to repeat the jesus prayer, "lord jesus christ, son of god, have mercy on me, a sinner.", holding his breath while doing so. one is to never treat it as a string of syllables for which the "surface" meaning is secondary. likewise, hollow repetition is considered to be worthless (or worse than worthless) in the hesychast tradition. ultimately, the hesychast is suppose to feel a sense of unspeakable ecstasy and see himself surrounded by rays of supernatural divine light, the same uncreated light which had appeared to the disciples of jesus on mount tabor. this stage can only achieved after the hesychast has spent a long time practicing hesychasm. 

saint theophan the recluse once related that body postures and breathing techniques were virtually forbidden in his youth, since, instead of gaining the spirit of god, people succeeded only "in ruining their lungs."

orthodox tradition warns against seeking extasy as an end in itself. the end of hesychast prayer is "acquisition of the holy spirit" and salvation. any extatic states or other unusual phenomena that may occur in the course of hesychast practice are considered secondary and unimportant. moreover, seeking after unusual "spiritual" experiences can be of great harm, ruining the soul and the intellect of the seeker. it can induce a state of "prelest" - spiritual delusion, the antonym of sobriety - in which a person believes himself or herself to be a saint, has hallucinations in which he or she "sees" angels, christ, etc. this state is pleasurable, but it can lead to suicide, madness and, according to hesychast fathers, makes salvation impossible. 

gregory palamas: defender of hesychasm
hesychasm was defended theologically by gregory palamas at about three separate hesychast synods in constantinople in the 1340s; he was asked to by his fellow monks on mt. athos to defend it from the attacks of barlaam of calabria, who advocated a more intellectual approach to prayer.

