fr:bouddhisme hînayâna eo:hinajanoja:小乘 zh-cn:小乘佛教 sv:hinayana

hinayana (sanskrit lit. lesser vehicle) is a term often used to identify early buddhist schools that are now mostly extinct. there are various views on the use and meaning of the term hinayana.

what hinayana represents
according to the mahayana tradition, which coined the term, hinayana represents two of the three paths and three classes of liberation.  
the three classes of liberation are all identified as freedom from samsara.  these are:
shravakayana: the hearer vehicle; practitioners are liberated as shravaka buddhas (arhats).
pratyekayana: the solitary vehicle; practitioners are liberated as pratyeka buddhas.
bodhisattvayana: the buddha-mind vehicle; practitioners are liberated as bodhisattva buddhas.

the mahayana schools group the first two paths together, as the result is a state of arhat.
whereas the last path is identified as distinct, because the result is a state of buddha.

the usage of 'hina-' as a prefix therefore covers those paths that do not result in buddhahood, so the reason why the paths were called 'inferior' was that buddhahood was not a result.

in candragomin's summary of asanga's magnum opus, we find in the eighteen root vows of the bodhisattva, an explicit injunction not to criticise, condemn, denigrate or reject the hinayana texts, practices, or traditions.  the very fact that this is made explicit in the early mahayana tradition suggests that not only some practitioners made this mistake early on in the development of the mahayana tradition, but also that such an attitude was a complete misinterpretation of the training and attitude of the trainee bodhisattva.

many mahayana texts say that there are many followers of mahayana schools who are actually following hinayana paths.  this is not bad in itself - these followers will still achieve liberation. 

the 18,000 verse perfection of wisdom sutra (a mahayana sutra) states:
"bodhisattvas should practice all paths - whatever is a path of a sravaka, a pratyeka or a buddha - and should know all paths." je tsongkhapa goes on to say, relying heavily upon asanga, "mahayana followers must practice all those things taught in the hinayana scriptures, with a few exceptions, such as diligently seeking blissful peace for ones-self alone."

this so far concerns the definition of the word hinayana as it is used in terms of the motivation or purpose of the practitioner.  

modern mahayana buddhists acknowledge that the term is also used for schools or traditions that traditionally reject the mahayana sutras. in this context, most tibetans now prefer to use the term 'nikaya', as cannot be interpreted as having a pejorative connotation.

 theravada reaction to the term hinayana 
as the sole surviving school which adheres to the so-called hinayana doctrines some theravadins see the term as a slander.

hinayana is often thought of as pejorative - the word hina means "lower, inferior; poor, miserable; vile, base, abject, contemptible, despicable" (pali text society dictionary). according to the theravadins, the term was coined by the mahayana schools solely as a way to differentiate themselves from the schools with which they were in doctrinal dispute, though the term is used within both the nikaya and mahayana texts solely within a context of categorising people or things into 'inferior', 'middling', and 'superior' groups.  the argument for pejorativeness is similiar to the discussion of how best to describe those students of 'low ability' in the modern educational framework.

theravadins claim that mahayana texts, such as the lotus sutra, and the vimalakirti nirdesha contain deliberate polemics against formalism and disputed doctrines which are directed at those groups of buddhists for which they coined the term hinayana, however, this is hard to reconcile against the early indian mahayana teachers such as asanga and candragomin who went out of their way to explicitly prohibit the mahayana practitioner (trainee bodhisattva) from denigrating or rejecting the nikaya sutras and paths.

usage of hinayana today

the term is still in current use to describe traditions that aspire to arhatship, especially in some tibetan buddhist circles because they inherited texts and teachings from all of the 'yanas' and simply adopted the terminology of the mahayana sutras.

many buddhist schools today are adopting the terms "nikaya" or "shravakayana" when referring to the theravada and other schools of the past, since hinayana has been seen to be offensive by the theravada and their followers, while some modern mahayana buddhists insist that as the term is not and never was pejorative, there is no need to seek an alternative.

