like the rest of south asia, india has stagnated economically since independence in 1947, while countries in nearby south-east asia and east asia have made remarkable strides in wealth creation.

actually, sri lanka started privatizing, and opening up it's market, in the late 1970s, and india was not far behind. now, even the communist parties talk about how to make this transition well (though they're still opposed, in principle).

is the indus valley cradle of the ancient civilization mentioned in the article now part of pakistan?

india used to be a great colonial master herself, the days of the mauryas.

i'm not familiar with this: who was a colony of whom?

in the days when mighty empires like the mauryas, guptas, etc. ruled present-day india, they colonised other smaller kingdoms not only in but also outside present-day india. many of those empires included vast regions of pakistan, afghanistan, myanmar, etc. the above are examples of north indian empires. the chola empire (south indian) colonised territories as far away as the delta of the ganges and the malacca strait in se asia.

since transnational issues has grown out of its dark cia past, it should be put on its own page. however, i think transnational issues of india is kind of cumbersome. any ideas? - eean

i hear the part about nonviolent indepence is incorrect. anyone know anything about this?

"the republic of india, located in the south of asia, is the second most populated country in the word and is the world's largest democracy with about a billion people and a thousand plus languages."

whoa, a thousand languages is a *lot*. 

i see a page here http://www.sanyal.com/india/indlang.html "325 recognized indian languages" and here http://www.abhishek.mybravenet.com/languages%20of%20india.htm "india's schools teach 58 different languages. the nation has newspapers in 87 languages, radio programmes in 71, and films in 15."

can anybody help sort this out?

re india/religions:

does anybody remember anything about the (legendary?) early christian communities in india?  (saint thomas ???)