most of the transport system in ireland rests in public hands, both north and south of the border. the road network has evolved separately north and south, while the rail network was mostly created prior to the partition of ireland.

in the republic of ireland, the minister for transport, acting through the department of transport, is responsible for the state's road network, rail network, public transport, airports and several other areas. although some sections of road have been built using private or public-private funds, and are operated as toll roads, they are owned by the irish government. the rail network is also state owned and operated, while the government currently still owns the airports in the state (though the authorities running them are due to be privatised). public transport is mainly in the hands of a statutory corporation, coras iompair éireann, and its subsidaries, bus átha cliath - dublin bus, bus éireann - irish bus, and iarnrod éireann - irish rail.

on november 1st 2005 the dublin government published he transport 21 plan which includes €18bn for imporved roads and €16bn for improved rail, including the western rail corridor and the dublin metro.

in northern ireland, the road network and railways are in state ownership at present. the department for regional development is responsible for these and other areas (such as water services), but as the northern ireland assembly is currently suspended, the department is operated by london (direct rule). the main airports in northern ireland are privately operated and owned. a statutory corporation, the northern ireland transport holding company (which trades as translink) operates public transport services through its three subsidaries - northern ireland railways company limited, ulsterbus limited, and  citybus limited (now branded as metro).

railways
total (1998) - 1,947 km
5'3" (1600mm) gauge
38 km electrified; 485 km double track

main article: rail transport in ireland

intercity railway services provided by iarnród éireann (ié) link dublin (connolly, heuston & pearse street stns.) to cork (kent stn.), waterford (plunket stn.), kilkenny (macdonagh stn.), galway (ceannt stn.), tralee (casement stn.), sligo (macdiarmada stn.), limerick (colbert stn.) and belfast. rail in northern ireland is run by northern ireland railways (nir), connecting belfast to derry (londonderry) and providing suburban services around the city. the cross-border dublin-belfast 'enterprise' service is jointly run by ié and nir.

many lines in the west were decommissioned in the 1930s under éamon de valera. there is a campaign to bring these back into service, in particular the limerick-sligo line (the western rail corridor), to facilitate economic regeneration in the west, which has lagged behind the rest of the country. there is also a smaller campaign to re-establish the rail link between sligo and enniskillen/derry.

since 1984 an electrically operated train service runs between bray and howth, called the dublin area rapid transit. in 2004 a light rail system, luas, was opened in dublin. as of 2004 a metro system is also in the planning stage. the luas system has caused much disruption in dublin, in retrospect many believe an underground would have been a better option, one of the current options being discussed is to upgrade the luas to the metro system when the metro is being installed.

see also: history of rail transport in ireland

 