de:cembalo  es:clavicordio 
fr:clavecin ja:ハープシコード nl:klavecimbel 
pl:klawesynzh:%e7%be%bd%e7%ae%a1%e9%94%ae%e7%90%b4

a harpsichord is the general term for a family of european keyboard instruments which generate sound by plucking (rather than striking, as in a piano) a string. 
it is thought to have originated when a keyboard was affixed to the end of a psaltery, providing a mechanical means to pluck the strings.

how harpsichords work 
the action is fairly similar between all harpsichords:

 the keylever is a simple pivot which rocks on a pin passing through a hole drilled through it.
 the jack is a thin rectangular piece of wood which sits upright on the end of the keylever, held in place by the guides - upper and lower - which are two long pieces of wood with holes through with the jacks can pass.
 in the jack, a plectrum juts out almost horizontally, (normally the plectrum is angled upwards a tiny amount) and passes just under the string. historically, plectra were normally made of crow quill, or leather, though most modern harpsichords use a plastic (delrin or celcon) instead.
 when the front of the key is pressed, the back is lifted up, the jack is raised, and the plectrum plucks the string.
 upon lowering the key, the jack falls back down under its own weight, and the plectrum pivots backwards to allow it past the string. this is made possible by having the plectrum held in a tongue which is attached with a hinge and a spring to the body of the jack.
 at the top of the jack, a damper of felt sticks out and keeps the string from vibrating when the key is not depressed.

kinds of harpsichords
while the terms used to denote various members of the family are relatively standardized today, in the harpsichord's heyday, this was not the case.

in modern usage, a harpsichord can mean all the members of the family, or more specifically, the grand-piano-shaped member, with a vaguely triangular case accommodating long bass strings at the left and short treble strings at the right; characteristically, the profile is more elongated than that of a modern piano, with a sharper curve to the bentside. 
a harpsichord can have from one to three, and occasionally even more, strings per note. often one is at four-foot pitch, an octave higher than the normal eight-foot pitch. 
single manuals, or keyboards are common, especially in italian harpichords, though many other countries tended to produce double-manuals.

the virginal is a smaller and simpler rectangular form of the harpsichord, with only one string per note running parallel to the keyboard on the long side of the case.  often the word was rendered with a suffix:  virginals.  the origin of the word is obscure but it is usually linked to the fact that the instrument was frequently played by young women.  note that the word "virginal" in elizabethan times was often used to designate any kind of harpsichord; thus the masterworks of william byrd and his contempories were often played on full-size italian style harpsichords, and not just on the virginals as we call it today.

finally, a harpsichord with the strings set at an angle to the keyboard (usually of about 30 degrees) is called a spinet.  in such an instrument, the strings are too close to fit the jacks between them in the normal way; instead, the strings are arranged in pairs, the jacks are placed in the large gaps between pairs, and they face in opposite directions, plucking the strings adjacent to the gap. 

unsurprisingly, for an instrument that was produced in large numbers for over three centuries, there is a great deal of variation between harpsichords. 
in addition to the varied forms that the instrument can take, and the different dispositions, or registrations, that can be fitted to a harpsichord, as mentioned above, the range can vary greatly. 
generally, earlier harpsichords have smaller ranges, and later ones larger, though there are frequent exceptions. 
in general, the largest harpsichords have a range of just over five octaves, and the smallest have under four.  usually, the shortest keyboards were given extended range using the method of the "short octave".

 history of the harpsichord  
the origin of the harpsichord is lost in the middle ages.  the earliest written 