hmmm.  this is hardly neutral point of view.  the efficacy of psychotherapy is very much doubted by those who use behaviourism or cognitive psychology as the basis for their theraputic work, and freud himself gave up on hypnosis as a useful method for psychotherapy.  also, the articles claims for "success rates" is unsourced, and probably ignores the issues of the placebo effect, the possibility the patients would have gotten better without treatment, doesn't define "successful treatment", and doesn't compare the success rate with alternative treatment methods. --robert merkel

hence, i removed this sentence from the main article:

hypnotherapy is very successful with motivated clients that are mentally well (that is, they have a firm grip of reality), and with this specific group of clients, it often has a success rate of roughly 65-70%, according to some practitioners.  

i should add that the article does contain quite a lot of useful information. --robert merkel

i disagree with your position that behavorists and cognitive psychologist are not successful hypnotists.  i read a book by pavlov the famous russian learning theorist.  he described hypnosis as "cortical inhibition".  it is when a stimulus no longer produces the reward.  while the stimulus then reward is exciting, the stimulus and no reward causes inhibition.  the lack of reward causes slowing down or something like sleep.  he demonstrated this with an experiment.

albert ellis is a cognitive psychologist and he has written many articles on hypnosis.  he wrote one of the hypnotic scripts in the book "hypnotic suggestion and metaphors" by norton publishers, page 168.  it is titled "rational emotive suggestions about anxiety".

freud was a long time ago.

why do the teachings of a person (erica fromm) belong here? please provide some information on this person's authority in the subject, how widely accepted her ideas are, etc. - centrx 21:38, 6 jul 2004 (utc)

criticism
i really think that this article needs a criticism section, seeing how hypnosis is often perceived as dangerous by health professionals (i.e. the highly suggestible state of the subject). i would include some criticisms myself, but i'm not familiar enough with research/applications in this area. dr.alf

absolutely. does anyone know of a study where they compared people who were put under "hypnosis" for 1/2 hour a day compared to just lying down and relaxing for a 1/2 hour? i'm sure the "you're getting very very tired" part helps with stress, but i'm not convinced there's any medical effects besides those of the relaxation.--ak7 17:52, 2 february 2006 (utc)