i just deleted the section on techniques because it was an advertisement that somebody put up for their services. not very appropriate for wiipedia.

hmmm.  this is hardly neutral point of view.  the efficacy of psychotherapy is very much doubted by those who use behaviourism or cognitive psychology as the basis for their theraputic work, and freud himself gave up on hypnosis as a useful method for psychotherapy.  also, the articles claims for "success rates" is unsourced, and probably ignores the issues of the placebo effect, the possibility the patients would have gotten better without treatment, doesn't define "successful treatment", and doesn't compare the success rate with alternative treatment methods. --robert merkel

hence, i removed this sentence from the main article:

hypnotherapy is very successful with motivated clients that are mentally well (that is, they have a firm grip of reality), and with this specific group of clients, it often has a success rate of roughly 65-70%, according to some practitioners.  

i should add that the article does contain quite a lot of useful information. --robert merkel

can hypnotherapy be successful in curing clinical depression? malau1

i disagree with your position that behavorists and cognitive psychologist are not successful hypnotists.  i read a book by pavlov the famous russian learning theorist.  he described hypnosis as "cortical inhibition".  it is when a stimulus no longer produces the reward.  while the stimulus then reward is exciting, the stimulus and no reward causes inhibition.  the lack of reward causes slowing down or something like sleep.  he demonstrated this with an experiment.

albert ellis is a cognitive psychologist and he has written many articles on hypnosis.  he wrote one of the hypnotic scripts in the book "hypnotic suggestion and metaphors" by norton publishers, page 168.  it is titled "rational emotive suggestions about anxiety".

freud was a long time ago.

why do the teachings of a person (erica fromm) belong here? please provide some information on this person's authority in the subject, how widely accepted her ideas are, etc. - centrx 21:38, 6 jul 2004 (utc)

criticism
i really think that this article needs a criticism section, seeing how hypnosis is often perceived as dangerous by health professionals (i.e. the highly suggestible state of the subject). i would include some criticisms myself, but i'm not familiar enough with research/applications in this area. dr.alf

absolutely. does anyone know of a study where they compared people who were put under "hypnosis" for 1/2 hour a day compared to just lying down and relaxing for a 1/2 hour? i'm sure the "you're getting very very tired" part helps with stress, but i'm not convinced there's any medical effects besides those of the relaxation.--ak7 17:52, 2 february 2006 (utc)

i personaly feel that this part:

the hypnotist-subject relationship has been feared by some due to the practice of stage performers. in a book by erica fromm, it has been referred to as "archaic involvement", listing these responses in the "patient":

feeling like a child in relation to the hypnotist. 
wanting to please the hypnotist. 
feeling guilty at not doing what the hypnotist wants. 
worrying the hypnotist will not like you. 
wanting to bask in the "power and glory" of the hypnotist. 
everything the hypnotist says and does deeply matters. 

hypnotherapy, however, usually takes place in a clinical setting, within the framework of an individual course of therapy.
 

seems to be written without much thought into the matter and simply taken from the book, and if this is the way it has been written in the book then i daresay erica fromm is giving false information. i understand that these can be problems but it is not specified that these kinds of reactions could occur in any setting with a therapist whether they by utilising hypnotherapy or not. it should be stated that this is common in all counselling/therapy related situations, and indeed even in day to day living where a person is being spoken to by someone they feel is superior. this person seems to be using scare-tactics to put hypnotherapy in a negative light.

also more evidence should be put forward as to the benefits of hypnotherapy, and reference from other writers on the subject.

i'm new to this system but felt i had to contribute as i am a hypnotherapist, psychotherapist, and trainer, so this is my area of expertise.

far from the efficacy of psychotherapy being questioned by cognitive or behaviour therapists, these are often classed as forms of psychotherapy themselves.  

freud abandoned hypnosis for a variety of reasons most of which would now be seen as highly questionable.  one was that he was frightened that subjects would become sexually attracted to the hypnotist, a conclusion he seems to have based upon a single anecdote.  later in his career he published an article entitled on the future of psychoanalysis (if i remember rightly) in which he accepted that hypnotherapy would have to be re-introduced to psychoanalysis in order to increase its effectiveness and speed the process of therapy up.

regarding the placebo effect, there are now many reliable clinical trials which compare hypnosis to placebo and/or other treatment methods.  i will supply 