thumb|a large hailstone

hail is a type of graupel (a form of precipitation) composed of spears or irregular lumps of ice.  it occurs when supercooled water droplets (remaining in a liquid state despite being below the freezing point, 0 °c/32 °f) in a storm cloud aggregates around some solid object, such as a dust particle or an already-forming hailstone.  the water then freezes around the object.  depending on the wind patterns within the cloud, the hailstone may continue to circulate for some time, increasing in size.  eventually, the hailstone falls to the ground, when the updraft is no longer strong enough to support its weight.

left|thumb|hailstorm

hail often forms in strong thunderstorms, often along a cold front, where the layer of air on top is much colder than that on the bottom.  the smaller hailstones can bounce up and down between the warm and cold layers due to updrafts and gravity.  the longer the stones bounce around, the larger they grow.  for the same reason, larger hail can occur in warmer regions in the world due to stronger updrafts.  these strong, severe, or even supercell thunderstorms can also occur in summer, even without a cold front. in the picture to the left, large hail collects on streets and grass during a severe thunderstorm. 

hail can do serious damage, notably to automobiles, skylights, and glass-roofed structures.  rarely, massive hailstones have been known to cause concussions or fatal head trauma.

hailstones, while most commonly only a few millimetres in diameter, can sometimes grow to several centimetres or occasionally even bigger. pea or golfball-size hailstones are not uncommon in severe storms. the image to the right shows an aggregate hailstone with smaller stones visible. the ruler shows the size of this hailstone as approximately 6 cm, almost the size of a tennis ball. 

costly or deadly hailstorms

5 may 1995, dallas texas, $2 billion
11 july 1990, denver colorado, $625 million, softball-sized hail destroyed roofs and cars
19 july 2002, henan province china, 25 dead and hundreds injured

