hydrogen peroxide (h2o2) is a viscous liquid that has strong oxidizing properties and is therefore a powerful bleaching agent that has found use as a disinfectant and (in strong concentrations) as an oxidant in rocket fuels.

it is commonly used (in very low concentrations, such as 5%) to bleach human hair, hence the phrases "peroxide blonde" and "bottle blonde". it burns if it comes into contact with the skin in sufficient concentration.  in lesser concentrations, it is used medically for cleaning wounds and removing dead tissue.  

hydrogen peroxide reacts with most things, including dirt, to decompose into water and oxygen gas. containers for hydrogen peroxide, therefore, must permit oxygen gas to escape, lest it build up and eventually cause an explosion, or be sealed against contaminants and be made of one of the few materials that hydrogen peroxide does not react with, such as stainless steel. the use of a catalyst (such as manganese dioxide, silver, or the enzyme catalase) vastly increases the rate of decomposition of hydrogen peroxide.

hydrogen peroxide has also been used as a fuel for propulsion. its use in torpedoes has been discontinued by most navies due to safety considerations.  a hydrogen peroxide leak was blamed for the sinkings of hms sidon and the russian submarine kursk.  it works best as a propellant in extremely high concentrations, however, there are very few suppliers of high purity hydrogen peroxide, and they are averse to selling to any but the largest institutions.  as a result, amateurs wishing to use this for rocket fuel usually have to purchase 70% or lower purity (most of the remaining 30% is water, and sometimes there are traces of stabilizing materials, such as tin, to reduce the decomposition rate), and increase its concentration themselves, since 70% makes for extremely poor fuel compared to 90% or better.  many try distillation, but this is extremely dangerous with hydrogen peroxide.  a safer approach is sparging, followed by fractional freezing.  sparging takes advantage of the fact that warm (not hot) air will preferentially evaporate hydrogen peroxide, although this is more useful for removing any non-water impurities than for changing the water to hydrogen peroxide ratio.  fractional freezing takes advantage of the fact that hydrogen peroxide freezes at a different temperature than water, and works better if the impure hydrogen peroxide is seeded with crystals of frozen, pure (or nearly pure) hydrogen peroxde.

exact data on the purification of hydrogen peroxide is hard to come by, since most people with experience with this chemical know how hazardous it can be, and are afraid of getting sued if an amateur follows their instructions and winds up injured or dead, or deliberately uses the purified hydrogen peroxide as a bomb.  they prefer that these amateurs calculate the numbers themselves from the basic properties, such as the freezing point of peroxide and the freezing point of water.  similar circumstances often require those who would try these experiments to lie about their intentions to the 70% hydrogen peroxide suppliers, since these companies do not wish to be seen as officially supporting hydrogen peroxide rocketry experiments.

