italics
all of these film titles need to be in italics. i'll do my part, but there are a lot of them to be sure.

definition
ok -- i think we need definition here -- are these films based on actual historical characters or events -- or just any crap set in the past? my vote is for the former, in which case gwtw and barry lyndon (although it is at times brilliant) should be ousted.  they're based on books, not actual events or persons.  i would vote to leave in the shakespeare, though, since it is drama about historical people and events...opinions??jhk  

but shakespeare's take on history is as dubious as say the authors of the screenplay of pearl harbour... his stuff is politically motivated (e.g. the blackening of the character of king richard iii, etc). one in, all in... i do think we can accept that while robin hood, men in tights, (amusing though it is), probably doesn't belong here, monty python and the holy grail which makes some fairly heavyweight points about historical social and political conditions as well as the nature of history itself probably does. sjc

i agree about shakespeare's motivations, but maintain that, since his historical plays are about real people, they go here -- they're actually great for teaching tudor/stuart politics -- and for teaching how we need to be critical of our sources.  i would also keep holy grail and life of brian -- but not ben hur. and would keep pearl harbor -- it happened, and it's interesting to compare with tora tora tora...jhk

my understanding is that historical drama is separated from docudrama by the former being fictional events in a historical setting and the latter being based on true events.  so titanic would be a historical drama as the main plot of the movie, the story of rose and jack, was fictional, whereas something that was about true events, such as ray, is docudrama.  even though it took some liberties with the material, the main plot really happened.  so in short, historical dramas get their setting from history and docudramas get their plot from history. ace of sevens 13:02, 7 june 2006 (utc)

i would like to see this excellent list divided into two classes: (1) dramas that adhere closely to historical events and (2) dramas that are stories based loosely, or closely, on historical events and personages. thus, zulu and zulu dawn would be class 1 but the almost entirely fictional shaka zulu would be in class 2. docudramas of the kind shown on b.b.c. knowledge, history channel, etc., would go in class 1. class 2 would also also provide for the errol flynn / olivia de havilland "historical" movies that have been left out (e.g.,  other versions charge of the light brigade and robin hood are included but not poor ol' errol's; even, ugh, they died with their boots on would be eligible for class 2 inclusion). user:mzee mvuvi

 we need to be more strict about time period 

i propose that all world war 2 films are merged and linked with the article labelled list of world war ii films  you can see that once you look there, how big of a task it would be to list them all.

i would support that.  there are just too many to include them in this list without completely overwhelming it.  matthew dillenburg (talk) 18:24, 4 december 2010 (utc)

good idea. i would also support that! dannylee9 (talk) 01:53, 10 may 2011 (utc)

 cleanup 

all films need dates. each section needs to be ordered, either by historical time period, which may be difficult, or by date of film, or in alphabetical order. there are other minor formatting issues that will be encountered by anyone attempting the above cleanup. yworo (talk) 16:41, 2 january 2010 (utc)

agreed. we need to have it by historical time period, but more accurate. not a film listed for 300 bc followed by a 1000bc. these lists are a mess and outdated, but are still more precise. http://www.vernonjohns.org/snuffy1186/movies.html--98.64.19.42 (talk) 01:40, 18 july 2010 (utc)

well, for the sake of good order, i guess i'll come back to wikipedia for this.  the movies should be in a sortable table, to be ordered by time period (earliest possible time period in case of ambiguity), release date, or title, with a section for notes.  tealwisp (talk) 20:12, 29 october 2010 (utc)
i would appreciate anyone's help building this table in my userspace at user:tealwisp/miscellaneous construction tealwisp (talk) 20:33, 29 october 2010 (utc)

the table is a really good idea, and i'll try to help out with that now that i've kind of got the hang of the formatting.matthew dillenburg (talk) 20:52, 1 december 2010 (utc)
i feel i should propose that the bce/ce format be reverted to bc/ad since there has not been obvious discussion and consensus which should have happened as stated in wp:era. if there has not been any discussion then the date formats will be changed to the latter. 78.146.132.102 (talk) 20:49, 19 march 2011 (utc)

i'm a noob at editing, but how can ivanhoe (1962) starring elizabeth taylor have been missed?thorsson64 (talk) 23:01, 21 march 2011 (utc)

we could quibble over any number of dramas included or excluded but i think one is worth mentioning because of what it says about the cultural orientation of the list and of discussions in general about movies and literature. the movie is the messanger, the life of the prophet. how many other dramas from asia and africa have gone unnoted? user:mzee mvuvi

 2001 prehistorical? 

how is 2001 set in a prehistorical time? there is a few minutes at the very beginning that would be "prehistorical," but this is only a few minutes, and the rest of the movie (the by-far overwhelming majority) is set in the (at the time it was filmed) future. — al-shimoni (talk) 22:41, 28 april 2011 (utc)

 suggestion!!! - column with country of origin/language 

and possibly other details as well like whether an entry is a tv series like "the tudors" for example. that way the list will be more comprehensive and useful. many thanks! dannylee9 (talk) 01:52, 10 may 2011 (utc)

 the entire list needs clarification, especially "films set in the later 20th century" 

this list is too unwieldy in its scope - it needs to be broken down into sub-sections. for example, a list called "war films" could surely encompass the majority of the films here. another list could be "historical television dramas" -  the tudors, for example, is not a film.

however, the worst culprit is the films set in the later 20th century section. how on earth can films like open water, quiz show, great ball of fire and the social network be included on this page? these films cannot sit comfortably in a section predominantly made up of war films, and their inclusion is frankly absurd. adam1516 (talk) 16:27, 10 june 2011 (utc)