humanæ vitæ (latin "of human life") is the name of the encyclical written by pope paul vi which expresses the official position of the catholic church regarding abortion, contraception, and other issues pertaining to human life. it was promulgated on july 25, 1968.

 summary 

the encyclical opens with the observation that circumstances often dictate that married couples should limit the number of children, and that the sexual act between husband and wife is still worthy even if it can be foreseen not to result in procreation.
nevertheless, it is held that the sexual act must "retain its intrinsic relationship to the procreation of human life", and the "direct interruption of the generative process already begun" is unlawful.

abortion, even for therapeutic reasons, is absolutely forbidden, as is sterilization, even if temporary.
similarly, every action specifically intended to prevent procreation is forbidden. this includes both chemical and barrier methods of contraception. all these are held to directly contradict the moral order.

therapeutic means which induce infertility are allowed, if they are not specifically intended to induce infertility.
natural family planning methods (abstaining from intercourse during certain parts of the women's cycle) are allowed, since they take advantage of "a faculty provided by nature."

the dangers of artificial methods of contraception are outlined: by allowing sex without consequences, moral standards would fall.

the encyclical closes with an appeal to public authorities to oppose laws which undermine the natural moral law (see natural law), an appeal to scientists to further study effective methods of natural birth control and appeals to doctors, nurses and priests to promote the method.

 history 

there has been a general christian prohibition on contraception and abortion, with such church fathers as clement of alexandria and saint augustine condemning the practice.  at the 1930 lambeth conference, the anglican communion changed its position by allowing for contraception in limited circumstances.  every other large protestant denomination has since modified its view on contraception to one of approval.  

in a partial reaction, pope pius xi wrote the encyclical casti connubii (on christian marriage) in 1930, reaffirming the catholic church's attachment to various traditional christian teaching on marriage and sexuality, including contraception even within marriage.  

in 1963 pope john xxiii established a commission of theologians to study questions of birth control. pope paul vi added laymen to this commission. the commission produced a report in 1966, finding that artificial birth control was not intrinsically evil and that catholic couples should be allowed to decide for themselves about the methods to be employed. two members of the commission produced a minority report stating that the church should not and could not change its earlier teaching. even though intended for the pope only, the commission's reports were leaked to the press in 1967, raising public expectations of a liberalization. however, paul vi explicitly rejected the majority's recommendations. the final language of the encyclical was heavily influenced by karol wojtyla (later pope john paul ii) who had defended the traditional church position from a philosophical standpoint in his 1960 book love and responsibility.

 reception 

many catholics disagree with the prohibition on artificial birth control and continue to use these methods. the policy has been criticized by development organizations who claim that it limits the methods available to fight world-wide population growth. 

