thumbnail|right|300|a crucifix with the stylized inri plaque attached.
--202.83.52.47 14:29, 27 october 2005 (utc)
 'inri''  is a latin acronym for iesus nazarenus rex iudaeorum (english: "jesus of nazareth [literally 'jesus the nazarene'], king of the jews [or 'judaeans']".) 

many crucifixes (or other sculpted or pictorial depictions of the crucifixion) include a stylized plaque or parchment, called a titulus or title, bearing the letters inri, occasionally carved directly into the cross, and usually just above the figure of jesus.  

in the gospel of john (19:19–20) the inscription is explained: 
 "pilate also had an inscription written and put on the cross. it read, 'jesus of nazareth, the king of the jews' (or 'jesus the nazarene, king of the jews,' depending on bible version). many of the jews read this inscription, because the place where jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in hebrew, in latin, and in greek." also

some eastern orthodox depictions of the crucifix have a slight variation, showing instead the letters inbi, based on the greek text of the inscription on the cross, iésous o nazóraios o basileus tón ioudaión. most orthodox depictions, however, change the title to o basileus tou kosmou''' (the king of the world), not implying that this was really what was written, but that it is what should have been written.

as pilate was loath to crucify jesus without justification, he used the standing roman treaty with the jews which allowed them limited self-government.  when the jewish priests complained that jesus was interfering with that self-rule by holding himself to possess authority that he lacked, pilate challenged him to deny that he was the "king of the jews".  jesus did not deny the accusation.

some believe that the justification for his crucifixion was his claim to an illegitimate title. however, john 19:21–22 kjv, alludes that pilate rejected the charge that jesus was crucified because he falsely claimed to be king and instead stated that jesus was crucified because he was the king of the jews. thus, some christians claim that pilate was personally convinced that jesus was the jewish messiah. the consequence of this is taken to the logical extreme by the ethiopian orthodox tewahedo church, which regards pilate as a saint (commemorated on june 25) based on a tradition of his conversion to christianity and martyrdom by crucifixion. most historians outside the ethiopian church have rejected this tradition as spurious.

the masons read the inscription as igne natura renovatur integra meaning "through fire, nature is reborn whole" or "by fire nature is renewed whole", symbolizing humankind's spiritual regeneration by the sacred fire of truth and love.

widespread conspiracy theories regarding the society of jesus--the jesuits--accuse them of harboring the secret meaning of iustum necar reges impius''. this is interpreted to mean the sanctioning of the murder of impious kings or tyrants, in short, those opposing the roman catholic church. these claims are false.

