frame|right|huey, dewey, and louie can usually be told apart by the colors of their clothing.huey, dewey and louie duck are fictional characters of the scrooge mcduck universe, donald duck's three almost identical nephews. they were created by ted osborne and al taliaferro and first appeared in a newspaper comic strip on october 17, 1937. their first on-screen appearance was in donald's nephews, released april 15, 1938.  

they are the sons of donald's sister della thelma duck, nicknamed "dumbella" and one of daisy duck's brothers. they are sent to donald temporarily until their father comes back from the hospital where he ended after their last practical joke of putting fire-crackers under his chair. their parents were never heard of again and donald had adopted them by 1942. they accompany their uncle donald and their grand-uncle scrooge mcduck in most of their adventures. they are generals of the world-wide scout organization the junior woodchucks.

according to don rosa, huey, dewey and louie duck were born in 1940 in duckburg, calisota.

the tv series quack pack added to the three their full names:
huey's full name is huebert duck.
dewey's full name is deuteronomy duck.
louie's full name is louis duck.

but according to interviews by taliaferro they were originally named after two political figures and an animator of the time:
huey was named after huey pierce long of louisiana.
dewey was named after thomas edmund dewey of new york.
louie was named after animator louie schmitt. for a profile of him see louie schmitt.

huey, dewey and louie in other languages:
croatian: hinko, dinko i vinko
czech: bubík, dulík a kulík 
danish: rip, rap og rup
dutch: kwik, kwek en kwak
finnish: tupu, hupu ja lupu
french: riri, fifi et loulou
faroese: dinni, danni, dunni,
german: tick, trick und track
hungarian: tiki, niki és viki
icelandic ripp, rapp og rupp
italian: qui, quo e qua
norwegian: ole, dole og doffen
polish: hyzio, dyzio i zyzio
portuguese: huguinho, zezinho e luisinho
russian: billy, villy i dilly
serbian: raja, gaja i vlaja (cyr: раја, гаја и влаја)
slovene: pak, žak in mak
slovak:hui,dui,lui
spanish: hugo, paco y luis (jorgito, juanito y jaimito in spain)
swedish: knatte, fnatte och tjatte
turkish: cin, can ve cem
indonesian: kwik, kwek dan kwak

huey, dewey and louie can be told apart by the colour of their hats and/or clothing: huey dresses in red, dewey in blue, and louie in green (or sometimes yellow).

on a few occasions, there is a fourth nephew, slipping through by a mistake of the artist. he has been named "phooey" by editor bob foster. one short egmont comic explained his existence as some freak-of-nature, dimensional warp, doppelgänger kind of thing.

in the kingdom hearts video game, huey, dewey, and louie run an item shop in traverse town. they sell the heroes items and weapons, but refuse to give "unca donald" a family discount.

the movie silent running had three robots named huey, dewey, and louie.

duck, huey, dewey and louie
duck, huey, dewey and louie

da:rip, rap og rup
de:bewohner von entenhausen#tick, trick und track
es:hugo, paco y luis
fr:riri, fifi et loulou
hu:tiki, niki és viki
it:qui, quo, qua
nl:kwik, kwek en kwak
no:ole, dole og doffen
nn:ole, dole og doffen duck
fi:tupu, hupu ja lupu
sv:knatte, fnatte och tjatte