what universities have such codes, and can we see an example? --dmerrill

can't say off the top of my head, but my brain whirls with half-remembered anecdotes of students forced to choose between expulsion or attend a re-orientation class of sorts (diversity training?), after expressing a 'politically incorrect' opinion. generally these anecdotes were in the context of debate over gay issues, afrocentrism, feminism... vice president cheney's wife wrote a book full of such ancecdotes, concerning professors who often lost tenure or jobs because they took their academic freedom farther than political correctness allowed. i'll need at least a day. --ed poor

hey, take two. :-) but it does need to be more specific. i tend to doubt any university's policy actually says flat out "you can't say foo", although i could be proven wrong. universities have done some bone-headed things. more likely it is couched in other terms. also we need to discuss the rationale behind the against-hate-speech people, i.e., the high level of hate crimes. but i'm leaving work now, so maybe later or tomorrow. --dmerrill

ed, again!!!

please stop.  you are oversimplifying a serious topic because you don't agree with it.  

you misunderstand: it is not true that i don't agree with the topic. i disagree with the way hate speech rules and laws are used to stifle free speech.

after all, the aclu supports the nazi party's right to speak, and that speech is always hate-ridden.  and yes, many institutions, public and private, have banned certain kinds of speech -- but it is seldom at the level of "you can't make such a comment in conversation" unless, of course, you happen to be in a position of authority.  

if it is "seldom", then it does occur. what is your position on such bans when they occur?

plus, your article implies that universities only push leftist, politically correct speech policies.

i have heard only of cases of conservative, politically incorrect speech being punished. please provide examples of leftist, poltically correct speech being punished, other than 9/11.

that would, of course, explain why several university professors who (after 9/11) made comments as mild as, "the arab world has plenty of reasons to hate the us" or, "i think invading afghanistan is a bad idea and here's why..." were threatened with job loss if they didn't retract their statements.  in institutions where i've studied and taught, hate speech includes anti-gay speech, but focuses much more on racist and misogynist speech.

you are proving me point here. are you aware of it? anti-gay, racist, and misogynist speech is politically incorrect.

at one school, some white students were required to take down a confederate battle flag in their window, because many other students, white and black, found it an offensive reminder of a racist past (the students with the flag claimed they were lynard skynard fans).  

i think that, if you find yourself typing the word 'homosexual', you should step back, remove the sentence, and take a deep breath.  and maybe even step away from the article.  :-) j hofmann kemp

whence comes this desire to censor the word homosexual? do you believe that my opinion of homosexuality is hate speech? if so, why? -- ed poor

no, ed, i don't-- i think that it is a buzzword we all recognize from you and we know it means you are about to try to infuse an article with your moral viewpoint.  

what's a buzzword? is that a term which has no actual meaning, as in orwell's duckspeak?
i am indeed infusing the article with my viewpoint. if my viewpoint needs labeling or attribution, please edit for completeness. 

you might do the same.  private institutions have a right to censor some speech, generally to prevent tensions leading to violence.  

you seem to be saying that certain groups must be protected from criticism, lest they become violent. if so, it seems to me that members of such groups should be excluded from universities if they cannot control their propensity for violence. or at least, people who tend to react violently to criticism should be taught to control themselves. i see no reason to restrict free speech, just because thin-skinned people might run riot.

if a stuident chooses to apply to such an institution, he has agreed implicitly to abide by those rules -- just as, if a student were to apply to and study at bob jones, and was caught having sex, he could expect to be expelled.  not a big difference.  i am not a proponant of pc -- i think it often keeps us from looking at the real underlying problems.  still, actions based on hatred of particular groups is illegal in the us.

i hate people who think particular groups should get immunity from criticism. i'm taking "action" against one right now, by posting this comment. am i guilty of a hate crime? --ed

and more hate crimes are perpetrated against minorities (or at least reported) than against white males.  

i vigorously oppose discrimination based on race, religion, country of origin, and sex. but hate speech rules do nothing to stop this discrimination. -- ed

and now, ed, i have actual meaningful work to do.  i know you're trying to pick fights, which is hardly christian or charitable, and i regret being drawn in.  

i'm not trying to pick a fight. i am just explaining and defending my edits. if there is something un-npov in an article, feel free to edit it. but please don't delete text simply because it differs from your pov. you can call me an axe-grinder if you want (even though according to your own definition that would be hate speech), but ad hominem arguments are useless here.

i have already resolved that i do not have the time to explain legitimate edits (based on npov grammar, and facts) to people with axes to grind.  your axe is way too big.  you refuse to accept that you write most of your articles from a non-npov, and then pick fights when people point this out.  you don't deserve the amount of time people put into dealing with you. j hofmann kemp  

i concede that some of my first drafts contain sentences that are from a non-npov, but that doesn't mean that most of my articles are from a non-npov. anyway, if there are errors, fix 'em. be a cooperative citizen. --ed poor

ed, if you can't say off the top of your head, shouldn't you take some time to research the topic before writing an encyclopedia article on it?

i think your idea to write an article on this topic is commendable, but this article seems vague and sloppy.  some suggestions
1) the first ammendment protects us from congress, not from private individuals or corporations.  therefore, the only hate-speech rules that would threaten first-ammendment rights are those rules promolgated by congress.  (for example, if my father tells me that he will not tolerate certain kinds of speech at the dinner table he is not violating my first ammendment rights; indeed, many mericans would challenge congress's right to prevent my father from making certain rules.

so any reasonable article must distinguish between federal law and rules instituted by individuals or corporations

2) a useful article should be based on facts -- please provide summaries of various anti-hate-speech laws/codes/statuts, as well as summaries of any court rulings on the constitutionality of such codes.

also, what is the theoretical/legal basis of this category?  i would expect any encyclopedia article to provide a brief history (when was the concept first developed, when was the first piece of legislation) and also a review of the theoretical basis for the concept (judith butler, maybe?)

someone else recently criticized you for submitting articles in which you had a bias.  i do not agree with that -- we all have biases, and we can all struggle to bring some npov into our contributions, and i know you have tried to do that.

my only objection is when someone write an article about something they are ignorant of or have not sufficiently researched.  sr

sr, you raise some good points:
to what extent are universities permitted to curtail first amendment rights? i suppose a private university could require students to practice the university's religion (establishment of religion) rather than some other religion (freedom of religion) and avoid expressing certain ideas aloud or in print (freedom of speech and press). but what if they accept public funding?
a fair point, a constitutional scholar would have to address this
i had hoped my stub would encourage someone more knowledgeable than me to provide "summaries of various anti-hate-speech laws/codes/statutes."

however, i believe there is some value in submitting incompletely researched articles. i call them "stubs" and have often found that the mere act of submitting a stub often results in an expert taking a few moments to dash off an adequate article.

on the other hand, i have been often frustrated to find that people adhering to the politically correct orthodoxy would rather waste tame fruitlessly accusing me of bias than to fix incomplete articles. as one who frequently stumbles over the distinction between what i really know and what is merely my personal bias, i can sympathize with such people: they don't know any better.

so let's all stop the pissing match and start working together to fix the articles. --ed poor

ed, i have done little to fix the article because i am not an expert in constitutional law or hate-speech.  when i see a wikipedia article and turn to it it is in the hope of being educated.  this is why i expect authors of articles to have researched their contributions.  perhaps like you i would indeed like to see a good article on hate speech.  i just prefer to leave it to people who are qualified.  

my advice to you is this: if you would like to see an article in wikipedia that you personally do not have time to research, propose it as a proposed article, and invite others to write it.  srfor example, for a college professor to say, "lesbians should not be schoolteachers", could be considered hate speech. 
the professor could be denied tenure, even if he were expressing his religious belief''

have there been cases like this or is this just a hypothetical in an attempt to discredit hate speech codes? if no evidence is provided, i will remove this paragraph. axelboldt