de:italieneo:italiofr:italienl:italiëpl:w%b3ochy
italy (italia) is a republic in the south of europe, consisting of a boot-shaped peninsula together with two large islands in the mediterranean sea: sicily and sardinia.  

the capital is rome, but the economic capital is milan in the north. other important cities include (in decreasing order of population) naples, turin, palermo, genoa, bologna, florence, venice. the peninsula is extended among tyrrhenian sea, ionian sea, adriatic sea. italy is one of the countries that use the euro currency; its national bank is banca d'italia, better known as bankitalia.

 national flag  image:italiabandiera3.gif 

italy is  well-known for its art, culture, and several monuments, among them the leaning tower of pisa and the roman colosseum, as well as for its food (pizza, pasta, etc.), wine, lifestyle, elegance, design and friendliness.

its history is perhaps the most important one for the cultural and social development of the mediterranean area as a whole. this country has had an important prehistoric activity, and archeological sites can be found im many regions: lazio and toscana (etruscan people), umbria, basilicata especially in the town of matera. after magna graecia, etruscan civilisation and roman empire, and the medieval humanism, the renaissance indeed shaped the whole of western art history and rome contains some of the most important examples of the baroque. today italy is considered a leading reference point for elegance, food, wine, culture, cinema, theatre, literature, poetry, visual arts, music (notably opera), holidays, and generally speaking, for taste. 

italy became a nation-state belatedly - in 1861 when the states of the peninsula and sicily were united under king victor emmanuel ii of the savoy dynasty, hitherto ruler of piedmont and kings of sardinia. rome itself remained for a decade under the papacy, and became part of the kingdom of italy only in 1870. vatican is now an enclave, like san marino.

the fascist dictatorship of benito mussolini that took over in 1922 led to a disastrous alliance with nazi germany and japan, and italian defeat in world war ii. in 1946 a referendum on the monarchy resulted in the establishment of a republic. 

italy was a charter member of nato and the european economic community (eec) and joined the growing political and economic unification of western europe, including the introduction of the euro in 1999. 
persistent problems include illegal immigration, the ravages of organized crime (mafia), corruption, high unemployment, and the low incomes and technical standards of southern italy compared with the more prosperous north.

italy has a diversified industrial economy with approximately the same total and per capita output as france or the united kingdom. this capitalistic economy (still mitigated by a wide presence of state and governmental influences) remains divided into a developed industrial north, dominated by private companies, and a less developed agricultural south, with substantial unemployment. 

most raw materials needed by industry and more than 75% of energy requirements are imported. for several years italy has adopted budgets compliant with the requirements of the european monetary union (emu); representatives of government, labor, and employers also agreed to an update of the 1993 "social pact," which has been widely credited with having brought italy's inflation into conformity with emu requirements. 

italy has been urged to work to stimulate employment, promote wage flexibility, hold down the growth in pensions, and tackle the informal economy. economic growth was 1.3% in 1999 and was expected to edge up to 2.6% in 2000, led by investment and exports. 

football is the main national sport. italy has won the football world cup three times: 1934, 1938 and 1982. some of world's best football players and teams come from italy. the latter include a.c. milan, inter milano fc, a.s. roma, s.s. lazio (also from rome), juventus (from turin), and fiorentina (from florence).

beautiful women:
sofia loren, gina lollobrigida, silvana pampanini, silvana mangano, virna lisi, ornella muti, claudia cardinale, francesca neri, carla bruni, maria grazia cucinotta. 

beautiful men:
marcello mastroianni, vittorio de sica, vittorio gassmann, rodolfo valentino, rossano brazzi, raoul bova, franco nero, eros ramazzotti.

tailors:
 valentino (valentino garavani), who gave his name to a very special red color ("rosso valentino")
 giorgio armani
 gianfranco ferré
 gianni versace, now his sister donatella
 nazareno gabrielli
 krizia
 moschino
 dolce & gabbana 
 salvatore ferragamo
 laura biagiotti

fashion firms:
gucci, fendi, bulgari, benetton, stefanel, superga, fila, davide cenci, loro piana, ermenegildo zegna, sergio tacchini, 

famous firms:
 ferrari (cars)
 maserati (cars)
 lamborghini (cars)
 fiat (cars and aircraft)
 lancia (cars)
 alfa romeo (cars)
 pininfarina (cars)
 bugatti (cars)
 isotta fraschini (cars)

 pininfarina (car design)
 italdesign (car design)
 zagato (car design)
 bertone (car design)

 piaggio (motorbikes and aircraft)
 gilera (motorbikes)
 moto guzzi (motorbikes)
 aprilia (motorbikes)
 laverda (motorbikes)
 benelli (motorbikes and guns)
 ducati (motorbikes)
 motobi (motorbikes)
 bimota (motorbikes)

 pirelli (rubber, tyres, cables)

 augusta (helicopters)
 beretta (guns)
 bernardelli (guns)
 franchi (guns and bicycles)
 partenavia (light aircraft)

 jacuzzi (furniture)
 scavolini (furniture)
 ariston (electronics, mechanics)
 rex (electronics, mechanics)
 zanussi (electronics, mechanics)
 de longhi (electronics, mechanics)

 mivar (electronics)

 fabriano (paper)

 bialetti (coffee machines)
 faema (coffee machines)
 gaggia (coffee machines)
 rancilio (coffee machines)
 carpigiani (ice cream machines)
 alessi (design objects)

 barilla (food)
 buitoni (food)
 alemagna (food)
 motta (food)
 algida (food)
 giacobazzi (wine)
 sella e mosca (wine)
 ferrero (food - nutella)
 peroni (beer - nastro azzurro)
 martini & rossi (drinks)
 ramazzotti (drinks)
 

from the cia world factbook 2000 and the u.s. department of state website. not wikified. 
 history of italy
 geography
 demographics of italy
 politics
 economy
 communications
 transportation
 military 
 music 
 foreign relations of italy 

countries of the world, by continent