italy (italia) is a republic in the south of europe.

it is a boot-shaped peninsula together with two large islands in the mediterranean sea: sicily and sardinia.

it is one of the countries that uses the euro currency.

the capital is rome (roma), but the economic capital is milan (milano) in the north. other important cities include (in decreasing order of population) naples (napoli), turin (torino), palermo, genoa (genova), bologna,  florence (firenze), venice (venezia).

italy is  well-known for its art, culture, and several monuments, among which the leaning tower of pisa, as well as for its food (pizza, pasta, etc.)

superb wine, unique lifestyle, supreme elegance.

people friendly smiling on the roads!

its history is perhaps the most important one for the cultural and social development of the whole mediterranean area.

renaissance is indeed the best relevant art influence over the entire art history.

today italy is the principal reference point for elegance, food, wine, culture, cinema, theatre, litterature, poetry, visual arts, holidays, and generally speaking, for taste.

italy became a nation-state belatedly - in 1860 when the city-states of the peninsula and sicily were united under king victor emmanuel ii (vittorio emanuele ii), of the savoy dinasty. savoia dinasty came from piedmont (piemonte - main town: turin = torino). 

they previously had become kings of sardinia (sardegna, sardinna), italy's most beautiful island.

rome itself, still held by vatican state (holy see), became part of the kingdom of italy only in 1870 (sep. 20th). 

the fascist dictatorship of benito mussolini that took over in 1922 led to a disastrous alliance with nazi germany and italian defeat in world war ii. 

however, fascism represented a unique case of social-ethic government which was able to build an organised state over the ruins of 19th century's weak governments, and to inspire the first national feeling of italy.

revival popularly followed. 

italy was a charter member of nato and the european economic community (eec) and joined the growing political and economic unification of western europe, including the introduction of the euro in 1999. 

persistent problems include illegal immigration, the ravages of organized crime, corruption, high unemployment, and the low incomes and technical standards of southern italy compared with the more prosperous north.

italy has a diversified industrial economy with approximately the same total and per capita output as france and the united kingdom. this capitalistic economy remains divided into a developed industrial north, dominated by private companies, and a less developed agricultural south, with more than 20% unemployment. 

most raw materials needed by industry and more than 75% of energy requirements are imported. for several years italy has adopted budgets compliant with the requirements of the european monetary union (emu); representatives of government, labor, and employers also agreed to an update of the 1993 "social pact," which has been widely credited with having brought italy's inflation into conformity with emu requirements. 

italy must work to stimulate employment, promote wage flexibility, hold down the growth in pensions, and tackle the informal economy. growth was 1.3% in 1999 and should edge up to 2.6% in 2000, led by investment and exports.

italy has won the football world cup three times: 1934, 1938 and 1982. some of world's best football teams come from italy. the latter include a.c. milan, inter milano fc, a.s. roma, s.s. lazio (also from rome), juventus (from turin), and fiorentina (from florence).

beautiful women: sofia loren, gina lollobrigida, silvana pampanini, silvana mangano, virna lisi, ornella muti.

beautiful men: marcello mastroianni, vittorio de sica, vittorio gassmann, rodolfo valentino, rossano brazzi, raoul bova.

taylors: valentino (valentino garavani), who gave his name to a very special red color ("rosso valentino") - nazareno gabrielli

fashion firms: gucci, fendi

from the cia world factbook 2000 and the u.s. department of state website. not wikified.

 history

 geography

 people

 government

 economy

 communications

 transportation

 military

 transnational issues