de:heterosexualität ja:異性愛 nl:heteroseksualiteit sv:heterosexualitet

the factual accuracy of this article is disputed.  the neutrality of this article is disputed.  for further information see talk:heterosexuality

heterosexuality is a sexual orientation characterized by romantic or sexual desire for, or sexual attraction toward, members of the opposite gender as distinguished from bisexuality and homosexuality.

in addition to referring to a sexual orientation, the term heterosexuality is also used for sexual behavior (or  sexual activities) between people of the opposite sex. most animal species, including humans, reproduce by heterosexual
intercourse.

heterosexualism is a system inwhich sexual attraction is to (or sexual relations with) persons of the opposite sex (ed. though other may not adhere to this system and this does not necessarily exclude them). [1] it is an ideology that specifies that arousal from members of the opposite sex is the valid expression of human sexuality (and has the capablility of functioning adequately). (compare with heteronormativity.)

terminology

hetero- comes from the greek word heteros, meaning "different" (for other uses, see heterozygote, heterogenous), and the latin for sex (that is, gender).  the term "heterosexual" was coined shortly after the word "homosexual." during the 1860s, karl maria kertbeny developed the term heterosexual (as an opposite to homosexual). [2] the word is sometimes shortened to "hetero" or "het," and can refer to both men and women, to sexual behaviour, to sexual orientation, and to sexual identity.

heterosexuality is colloquially referred to as being straight, although straight can also, though less often, mean anyone whose sexuality could be described as orthodox. for example, people who practice bdsm (bondage and discipline, domination and submission, and sadism and machochism) sometimes use the term to refer to anyone who does not (though the terms vanilla or vanilla sex are more common).  

the use of the term "straight" is used sometimes to denote a heterosexual person (or an individual that has sexual orientation to other individuals of the opposite sex). this term appears in early or mid 20th century gay slang as in, "to go straight", or stop being gay. one of the first coinage of this reference was in 1941 by the homosexual author, g. w. henry. henry's book concerned conversations with homosexual males and used this term in connection with the reference to ex-gays. note also that a related meaning of drug addictions inwhich straight is  "not intoxicated" (ie. sober). though not planned to refer to individuals that are heterosexual, it has been alterated over time to relay that meaning. [3]

a slang term for heterosexual is "breeder", which is sometimes used by individuals that do not have children and do not want offspring. a female breeder is commonly called a moo and a male breeder is commonly called a duh [ed. these individuals are usualy engaged in an long term relationship (eg. marriage)]. it is also used by homosexual individuals (sometimes heterophobic) in reference to heterosexual couples. 
the term primarily originates from the point that most heterosexual couples can "breed" or increasing the population (which homosexuals cannot). it usually has a negative or derogatory connotation. [4]

causes of heterosexuality
main article: causes of sexual orientation

sexual orientation and it's causes have been the subject of much attention and research. however, research on sexual orientation has not usually focused on the causes of heterosexuality. this is largely because heterosexuality has often been viewed as "normal" and non-heterosexuality as deviant; this view among many people, but there is a growing trend towards seeing sexuality as fluid and as covering a range.  this is due in part to kinsey's work.  

there has also been a realization that any attempt at understanding the causes of sexual attraction will be more successful if the mechanisms that underlie sexual attraction, in particular what causes many people to feel sexual attraction primarily towards members of one particular sex, are understood.  

according to american psychiatric association (apa), there are numerous theories about the origins of a person's sexual orientation, but most researchers agree that "sexual orientation is most likely the result of a complex interaction of environmental, cognitive and biological factors," and that genetic factors, play a "significant role" in determining a person's sexuality.[5] the apa believes that sexual orientation is not chosen and cannot be changed.

a broad array of opinion holds that much human behavior ultimately is explainable in terms of natural selection.  from this point of view, the reason why humanity as a whole exhibits a strong statistical tendency towards heterosexuality is that heterosexual intercourse has the potential for producing offspring and homosexual intercourse does not; explaining homosexuality is seen by some as one of the major challenges faced by evolutionary approaches to human behavior. others argue that many homosexual people procreate -- indeed, most historical figures who are considered homosexual procreated. in fact, the idea that gay people do not have children is a modern concept based on the modern conceptions of sexual identity which developed from the late 1800s to the 1960s.

prevalence of heterosexuality

heterosexuality is considered to be the most common sexual orientation. heterosexuality is also considered to be a social norm in many societies. 

heterosexuality usually implies an exclusive or predominant sexual orientation toward persons of the opposite gender.  in some studies, however -- notably dr. alfred kinsey's sexual behavior in the human male (1948) (isbn 0253334128) and sexual behavior in the human female (1953) (isbn 025333411x) -- analysis of self-rated sexuality on a continuum from exclusively heterosexual to exclusively homosexual along with analysis of behavior and identity seems to show that the majority of people are at least somewhat bisexual, although usually one sex is preferred. according to kinsey, only a minority of people, approximately 5-10%, can be considered to be fully heterosexual. [6]

just as sexual activity with a person of the same sex does not necessarily indicate homosexual orientation, sexual activity with a person of the opposite sex, in and of itself, does not necessarily demonstrate heterosexual orientation; it is, however, considered heterosexual behaviour. not all people who are attracted or have sexual relationships with members of the opposite sex identify themselves as heterosexual: people who do not identify primarily as heterosexual sometimes engage in heterosexual behaviour. these may include people who are not open about their sexual orientation, sex workers, erotic actors, and others.  similarly, some people frequently have sex with members of the same sex yet still see themselves as heterosexual.

