heterosexuality is a sexual orientation characterized by romantic love or sexual desire exclusively for members of the opposite sex or gender, contrasted with homosexuality and distinguished from bisexuality and asexuality. 

heterosexualism is a term that is used synonymously with both "heterosexism" and "heterosexuality". 

in addition to referring to a sexual orientation, the term heterosexuality is also used for sexual behavior (or  sexual activities) between people of the opposite sex.

definition

hetero- comes from the greek word heteros, meaning "different" (for other uses, see heterozygote, heterogeneous), and the latin for sex (that is, physical sexual differentiation).  the term "heterosexual" was coined shortly after and opposite to the word "homosexual" by karl maria kertbeny in the 1860s. [2] heterosexual was first listed in merriam-websters's new international dictionary as a medical term for "morbid sexual passion for one of the opposite sex", but in 1934 in their second edition unabridged it is a "manifestation of sexual passion for one of the opposite sex; normal sexuality". (katz, 1995)

prevalence of heterosexuality

heterosexuality is generally seen to be the standard sexual orientation. heterosexuality is the social norm in nearly all societies, but less and less so in the modern urbanity of the post-industrial age. there are other times and places (such as ancient greece) when other sexualities or completely different conceptions of sexuality were more prevalent as well.

heterosexuality usually implies an exclusive or predominant sexual orientation toward persons of the opposite gender. in some studies, however – notably dr. alfred kinsey's sexual behavior in the human male (1948) (isbn 0253334128) and sexual behavior in the human female (1953) (isbn 025333411x) – analysis of self-rated sexuality on a continuum from exclusively heterosexual to exclusively homosexual along with analysis of behavior and identity suggests that the majority of people are at least somewhat bisexual, although usually one sex is preferred. according to kinsey, only a minority of people, approximately 5–10%, can be considered to be fully heterosexual. [6] kinsey's views are wildly controversial, and not accepted by the community at large generally, nor the scientific community specifically.

psychological factors relating to sexuality
main article: causes of sexual orientation

a broad array of opinion holds that much human behavior ultimately is explainable in terms of natural selection.  from this point of view, the reason why humanity as a whole exhibits a strong statistical tendency towards heterosexuality is that heterosexual intercourse has the potential for producing offspring and homosexual intercourse does not.  

in traditional societies individuals are often under heavy social pressure to marry and have children, irrespective of their sexual orientation.  on the other hand many homosexuals wish for children, and some have found a way to procreate in spite of their sexual preference, generally through artificial or natural insemitation. 

sexual orientation and its causes have been the subject of much attention and research. however, research on sexual orientation has not usually focused on the causes of heterosexuality. this is largely because heterosexuality is generally viewed as normal and non-heterosexuality as deviant. there is a tendancy, particularly amongst the politically correct, and due in part to kinsey's controvercial theories, towards seeing sexuality as fluid and as covering a range. any attempt at understanding the causes of sexual attraction will be more successful if the mechanisms that underlie sexual attraction are understood.  

not all people who are attracted or have sexual relationships with members of the opposite sex identify themselves as heterosexual: people who do not identify primarily as heterosexual may sometimes engage in heterosexual behaviour. similarly, some people frequently have sex with members of the same sex yet still see themselves as heterosexual.

according to american psychiatric association (apa), there are numerous theories about the origins of a person's sexual orientation, but some believe that "sexual orientation is most likely the result of a complex interaction of environmental, cognitive and biological factors", and that genetic factors, play a "significant role" in determining a person's sexuality.[5] the apa currently officially states that sexual orientation is not chosen and cannot be changed, a radical reversal from the recent past, when non-normative sexuality was considered a deviancy or mental ailment treatable through institutionalization or other radical means.

terminology
the term "straight" is an ordinary (nontechnical) english word used to describe a heterosexual person, although the term appears to have originally derived from mid-20th century gay slang, ultimately coming from the phrase "to go straight" (as in "straight and narrow"), or stop being gay [3]. one of the first uses of the word in this way was in 1941 by author g. w. henry. henry's book concerned conversations with homosexual males and used this term in connection with the reference to ex-gays. though not originally intended to refer to heterosexuals, like the meanings of many words, its primary usage has changed over time.

the term breeder is sometimes used by members of the gay community to describe heterosexuals, sometimes playfully, but other times in a derogatory way, leading many to find the term generally offensive. the name "breeder" comes from the fact that the primary biological difference between heterosexual and homosexual sex is that heterosexual sex can result in reproduction, whereas homosexual sex cannot. while this is usually construed as one of the benefits of heterosexuality, use of the word "breeder" reverses that by using a word which is normally applied to non-human animals.

