helene (from greek: 'ελένη [helene - "torch" or "corposant"], modern greek pronuncation eleni, english  also helena, elena, hellen or ellen) is a very popular female name, first attested in the iliad (helen of troy). the name is used in many other languages. name days: hungary (as heléne) - october 14, estonia (as helen) - august 18, greece (as ελένη) - may 21.

famous namesakes
 two helene in greek mythology
 saint helena, the island in the south atlantic
 saint helena (disambiguation), other people and places called saint helena
 helene, the consort of simon magus
 helene (moon), a moon of saturn
 101 helena, an asteroid

princess helena of the united kingdom
helen atkinson-wood
helen chadwick
helen clark (uk politician), united kingdom politician
helen clark, new zealand prime minister
helen frankenthaler
helen gandy
helen garner
helen keller
helen hayes
helen hunt
helen mirren
bollywood actress helen (bollywood actress)
helen, sweetheart of the internet, a webcomic.
helen thomas

there are also towns named helena or helen in the united states:
helena, alabama
helena, arkansas
helena, montana
helena, ohio
helen, georgia
helen, maryland
helen, west virginia

other namesakes
admiral helena cain, a character on the science-fiction television series battlestar galactica.
helen clark, first elected female prime minister of new zealand.
helen (play) by euripides
hellen (son of deucalion and pyrrha, the ancestor of the greeks)
helenus, son of king priam of troy.
helen (inheritance), a fictional supporting character in christopher paolini's inheritance trilogy
helen (unit)
helena (dead or alive character), a character from the dead or alive video game series
helena (song), by my chemical romance
the ellen degeneres show, a syndicated television talk show
ellen (mary poppins character), a servant of the banks family in the mary poppins books and film.ellen (novel) is a 1986 novel by ita daly.ellen west (psychology)'' ludwig binswanger study case.
uss ellen (1861), a u.s. steamship during the civil war

"helena" may also be st. elmo's fire.

 other 
millihelen — the ammount of beauty required to launch a single ship.

