hunt the wumpus was an important early computer game. it was based on a simple hide-and-seek format, featuring a mysterious monster (the wumpus) that lurked deep inside a network of rooms. using a command line text interface, the player would enter commands to move through the rooms, or shoot arrows along crooked paths through several adjoining rooms. there were twenty rooms, each connecting to three others, arranged like the vertices of a dodecahedron (or the faces of an icosahedron). hazards included bottomless pits, super bats (which would drop the player in a random location) and the wumpus itself. when the player had deduced from hints which chamber the wumpus was in without entering it, he would fire an arrow into the wumpus' chamber to slay it. however, firing the arrow into the wrong chamber would startle the wumpus, which might then devour the player. 

originally written by gregory yob in basic while attending the university of massachusetts dartmouth, and noticed on mainframes at least by 1972, hunt the wumpus was first published in the "peoples computer company"peoples computer company, founded in october 1971, was a small non-profit group of independent educators who met in a small storefront on menalto rd. in menlo park, california during the 1970s.  the first issue of their journal, peoples computer company, was published in october 1972. journal in 1973, again in 1975 in "creative computing", and finally in 1979 in the book more basic computer games. building on several grid-based games of the "battleship" variety, yob injected adversarial humor into the computer's hints, prefiguring the "voice" of the infocom narrator. 1 later versions of the game offered more hazards and other cave layouts.  an implementation of hunt the wumpus was typically included with mbasic, microsoft's basic interpreter for cp/m and one of the company's first products.

other versions
a simple version of the game has also become a classic way of illustrating the concept of knowledge based agents, a kind of computer program in the field of artificial intelligence, where the program would take the role of the player, and usually play very well.

an early home computer version of hunt the wumpus with color graphics and randomized cave layouts appeared on the ti-99/4a in 1981.

versions of hunt the wumpus are currently available on the internet, for almost all operating systems and machines, including linux, the ipod, palm pilot handheld computers, and mobile phones. the first irc bot, named "gm" (for "game master") was a multiplayer hunt the wumpus game, in which firing an arrow into a room with other players caused another player to be killed: "foo is hit in the back with an arrow!" gm was written by greg lindahl. unfortunately, the "wumpus-o-matic" player never made it off the drawing board. 