other denominations
what about holy orders in eastern orthodoxy? or holy orders in anglicanism?

this is wikipedia.  put in a subhead and start typing.  i started with what i know best, and people added things. (notice that the entry makes no claims to completeness even for catholicism - it says 'in modern catholicism'.  i hope we'll get the history eventually). --michaeltinkler
i would -- except i don't know anything about them, and i am too lazy to do any research myself :) i was just hoping someone else might know, and chime in...

priestly ideals
the article says:

not all priests have lived up to these ideals: see catholic priests' sex abuse scandal.

catholic priests have broken every commandment.  there have been mass murderers among them, serial adulterers, thieves and con-artists.  in past centuries indulgences (forgiveness) was sold.  and what about the spanish inquisition?

yet several articles about the catholic church here at wikipedia mention none of that but with unseemly prurient interest they mention at the slightest excuse the recent sex abuse scandals.

i am inclined to remove the remark i have quoted.  would i be right to do so?

ok, new user.  forgive my lack of computer skills.  yes, i agree priests have broken all the commandments.  but that needs to stay seperate from the theology of holy orders.  the one is not the same as the other, though of course evil, esp in god's minister, effects not only the doer, but all people as well.

dave

psb777 11:32, 30 jan 2004 (utc)

holy orders in eastern orthodoxy
on the subject of holy orders in the eastern orthodox church there is an error, though one that is commonly made, and is even in some books. the article says that one is tonsured to the rank of reader and subdeacon, and this phrase is used in common speech, though it is not technically correct. the tonsure occures prior to the ordination of a man to the rank of reader. he is ordained a reader by the laying on of hand of the celebrant ( which is normally a bishop, though for these lesser orders an archimandrite or abbot may perform this ordination).  the ordinand is then latter ordained to the rank of subdeacon by laying of of hands. in the greek a distinction is made in these two types of ordinations. the lesser form is called chirothesis ( for minor orders) and the greater one is called chirotony ( for major orders). this may be an arcane point, but it is very significant and i would like to hear some feedback before i make any changes. i am new and i don't wish to step on any toes.

--frmaximos 03:50, sep 10, 2004 (utc)

 problem with researching religion 

people make the hugest emphases on the smallest details, therefore making it nearly impossible to absorb everything they say. to put it bluntly, its extremely boring. im doing a project on the history of religious orders and i nearly fall asleep when reading pages about it. i wish everything could be more clear and concise. on christianity- yes there are many faults with the religion, for example, if god created adam and eve, and they were perfect, why did they eat the forbidden fruit (which is never identified as an apple in the bible). we also come to the question why is there evil in the world? if god is a loving being why did he put evil in the world and why does he allow the innocent to die (helpless babies etc.) yes of course there is the common saying that it was meant to happen, but who wants a god that ordains the death of their family? these same imperfections plague the church as well. we cant expect them to be perfect because they are human. to me, christianity is an example of how powerful the mind is, if you catch my drift. look at what we can make ourselves believe. to make it fair, this is applicable to all religions, excluding buddhism. buddhism has been called the "perfection of natural religion", one that focuses on the power found inside of ones self instead of outside in some nonexistent (opinion) being.

some philisophical questions

what is truth
what is evil
can god create a rock he cant lift? 

my name is sky, skyd@culver.org, aim:culverpolopimp
feel free to respond.

by the way, as i have just learned anyone can make a post on this page by clicking the plus (+) tab at the top of the page.

tuesday october 19th 2004

hello i like you

december 6

thomas' summa theologiae answers some of your questions.  here is my shot at it.  truth is what is, not what we want it to be.  we can know  truth, but not all truth all at once.

what is evil?  other than a lack of good?  i would suggest a lack, period.  evil is nothing where there should be something.

last, it depends what you mean by lift.

dave

 ordination for women 

in today's evangelistic organizations, women are ordained as a matter of course. all it takes is a desire to be a minister and a willingness to serve other's in his name. while some organizations require a college degree and years of study, other organizations will ordain for the asking. in each it is up to the degree of study or time one wants to put into it.

many 'organized' churches also ordain women who feel called to minister to others in that capacity. while some differentiate on what a woman can do in that capacity, many don't.

i'm not clear on what you mean by "evangelistic organizations." parachurch organizations? denominational missionary agencies? please feel free to expand the section on the ordination of women, but be sure to specify when and where your comments apply. if you do plan to expand it, you might want to create a user account so your name doesn't appear as your address "12.216.83.20." --flex 14:53, 3 jan 2005 (utc)

 holy orders & ministry 

whilst the entry i added could go under the definition, it is more introductory than definitional. it would imo unbalance that definition. if the article was ordination rather than holy orders then it would be easier. paul foord 01:29, 14 may 2005 (utc)

 seperate ordiantion entry 

the entry for ordiantion redirects here and that's not correct since this  article forms part of the series christianity. not all ordiantions are christian, and this article is really mostly slanted towards the catholic church.

 "priest" etymology 

this article is the very first time anywhere i've seen it mentioned that "priest" might be derived from the latin "praepositus".  as far as i know, christian priests have never been called that, not even in rome, and in greek they're called "presbyteros" to this day, so this etymology seems unlikely at best.  is there a reference for it anywhere? csernica 04:17, 12 july 2005 (utc)

i agree. i've always understood the term to have developed similarly to presbyterate and presbyter. then again, i've been wrong before. -- essjay ·   talk 05:16, july 12, 2005 (utc)

from what i understand, the etymology is somewhat uncertain. the american heritage dictionary entry seems to confirm this: "middle english preost, from old english prost, perhaps from vulgar latin *prester (from late latin presbyter; see presbyter) or from west germanic *prvost (from latin praepositus, superintendent; see provost)." --flex 14:01, july 12, 2005 (utc)

again, first i've ever heard of this. i'll check the oed when i have a chance. is there any evidence anywhere, i wonder, for christain priests ever having been called "praepositus"? they were certanly called "prester" at one time. csernica 20:41, 12 july 2005 (utc)

 defintion of a hoy order 

 defintion of a holy order 

 two small changes 

careful readers will note two small chages under catholic holy orders.  they are orders, not degrees of ordination.  this is often confused, but the rite ordains one to an order.

second, while leo 13 did declare anglian orders null, it has never been taught infallibly.  theoretically, the church could change her mind in light of new information.

i find the inclusion of anglicans seeking ordination from old catholic bishops interesting, as i have know anglicans to do it for precisely the issue of apostolic succession.

dave

 