eo:historio de scienco kaj teknologio
the history of science and technology (hst) is a field of history which examines how humanity's understanding of science and technology has changed over the millennia, and how this understanding has allowed us to generate new technologies. this field of history also studies the cultural, economic, and political impacts of scientific innovation.

the advent of modern mathematical science is generally believed to have begun with the hellenic pythagoreans; although, it would be a mistake to believe that modern science was a "greek invention". rather, greek history has survived in far greater detail than the histories of other ancient civilizations. 

 challenge to orthodoxy 
a minor but persistent theme in the history of science and technology has been the poor reception often given to men who espouse ideas contrary to the prevailing orthodoxy. the story of galileo is a case in point. other natural philosophers and astronomers, especially in italy, were loathe to "check" their theories by looking through the newly-invented telescope. even in modern times, with the near-univeral acceptance of the scientific method and huge research budgets from government, academia and industry, unpopular or offensive ideas are often given short shrift. 

there is controversy over what the lesson of the galileo story is. while some see galileo's saga as an example of the arrogance of authority, others argue that today's rejection of such ideas can not be directly compared with examples such as galileo. theories which do follow the currently accepted principles of science closely, as galileo did, are generally accepted however surprising they may be, whereas ideas that make yet unproven and seemingly unjustified assumptions are termed pseudoscience. 

 contribution to knowledge 

be that as it may, after a lapse of time even the most unpopular idea can become the new orthodoxy, if proven satisfactorily. the germ theory of disease has become so prevalent that pasteurization and listerine are household words, even if louis pasteur and joseph lister are no longer remembered.

 major areas/sub-fields 

 science 
life sciences
biology
history of anatomy
theory of evolution
charles darwin and the origin of species
genetics
dna
paleontology
biochemistry
physical science
chemistry
history of physics
history of astronomy
geology and earth science
mathematics and statistics
philosophy and logic

 social science 
anthropology
 archaeology
 economics, business and industry
 industrial organization and labor
 geography
 language and linguistics
 political science
 psychology
 sociology

 technology 
 civil engineering
 architecture and building construction
 bridges, harbors, tunnels, dams
 surveying, instruments and maps, cartography, urban engineering, water supply and sewerage
 transportation
 energy conversion
 materials and processing
 metals, mining, metallurgy
history of the petroleum industry
gas
coal
rubber
plastic
ceramics
glass
cement
stone
salt
paper
lumber
textiles
leather
bone  
library and information science
history of computers
 health science
 history of medicine
 biotechnology
 agriculture
 family and consumer science
 military technology

 general science and technology 
biography of inventors, explorers, and scientists 
 list of scientists, list of engineers and list of inventors
 timelines of science and technology 
 technical societies, technical education
 economic, political, and social history
 general relationships between technology and culture; philosophy of technology

 historiography of science and technology
 kranzberg's laws of technology

 historians of science and technology:
 thomas p. hughes 
 arne kaijser
 thomas kuhn
 paul feyerabend

 future of science and technology (speculative)
 technological singularity

 ancient technological objects 
 the antikythera mechanism