 this article has been vandalized 

this article has been vandalized. —the preceding unsigned comment was added by 198.97.67.58 (talk) 15:06, 22 february 2007 (utc).

latin

in the article for george jellicoe, 2nd earl jellicoe is this: the house of lords minutes of proceedings for die martis 23° novembris 1999 records ....   why is latin used for this reference?  jackofoz 01:22, 26 february 2007 (utc)

reform
they have just voted in the house of commons to make it a completly elected house catintheoven 19:12, 7 march 2007 (utc)
 
you should be aware that this is only a motion proposed by the government. there is a motion for the house of lords to consider in the next few weeks, followed by further cross party talks on how to proceed. the next possible period in which a house of lords reform bill to go through parliament shall be at the next state opening of parliament, in novemeber. in other words, there may still be, 18 months say, for any solid legislature to be made law. if it does, indeed, because i doubt gordon brown shall want to persue such a policy in his first term as prime minister- he shall focus on social rather than constitional reforms.

 party affiliation in the lords 

to this outsider, this list of lords party affiliations on template:british_political_parties is pretty bewildering. i put a query on the template talk page, but didn't get an answer that made sense, so i am posting a (slightly reworded) version here.

right now this template says that there are 196 lords who are cross-benchers (which the corresponding wikipedia page defines as meaning that they are "member[s] of the british house of lords who [are] not aligned to any particular party") and thirteen are "non affiliated" (no link to any explanation).  what exactly is the distinction between these two categories?  while part of this is my idle curiosity, i'm wondering if there's any reason we need separate entries in the template. --jfruh (talk) 17:35, 11 march 2007 (utc)

peers in the house of lords who do not take a party whip (ie. they are not told how to vote by a political party) sit on the crossbenches. due to their independence crossbenchers do not adopt any collective policy positions. they speak in debates and vote in divisions as individuals. on most policy issues it would be rare if all crossbenchers who voted were only found to be supporting one side in a division. there is no process of whipping for the crossbenchers. 

the difference between crossbenchers and the few peers that are non-affiliated is that if you are a crossbencher you have the support and help of other crossbench peers, as opposed to non-affiliated lords who have to struggle through the complicated and bewhildering world of westminster by themselves- there are only 2 or 3 non-affiliated lords. the crossbenchers have a covenor, who is effectivley a leader of the crossbenchers. crossbenchers are often specialised in a particular field, and shall only really make a contribution when something they are an expert in crops up.

thank you for the explanation.  you say there are only 2 or 3 unaffiliated lords, but the template says that there are 13 -- is this in error?

a couple of follow-up questions: 

you make it sound like not participating in the crossbench group, such as it is, puts peers as a disadvantage -- why might they choose not to do so anyway?
is there any reason why lord brett should be broken out as an "independent" on this table?  or david stoddart, baron stoddart of swindon as "independent labour" and lord stevens of ludgate at a "conservative independent"?  is there a functional difference between these peers and those who are non-affiliated?
how about timothy beaumont, baron beaumont of whitley, who makes up a green caucus of one, or the two ukip peers -- is their situation functionally different from the unaffiliated? --jfruh (talk) 18:34, 24 april 2007 (utc)

there are 3 non-affiliated lords temporal. the reasons why they are non affiliated are: never attending the house (lord grenfell); being a liar and a criminal (lord archer- lords are still members of the house of lords even if they have been sent to prison); being a vicar (lord harries of pentregarth). the rest are the bishops, who are non-affiliated, but act as a party in their own right on many occasions, lead by the archbishop of cantebury.
lord brett and lord stoddart have had their whips removed for being 'rebels' (see chief whip). lord stevens (a former metropolitan police comissoner) is a member of the conservatives, but obviously isn't an officially certified member of their parliamentary party. all these lords are members of political parties but they do not to take the party whip. (clare short is the house of commons equivalent).
lord pearson of rannoch and lord willoughby de broke defected to ukip from the tories. lord beaumont of whitley defected to the greens from the liberals. the fact is that these three lords are members of a political party, and are offically recongnised by the party. they are not independant.

failed "good article" nomination
this article failed good article nomination. this is how the article, as of april 13, 2007, compares against the  six good article criteria:

1. well written?: yes
2. factually accurate?: no the article does not have adequate citations and sources.  it should have inline citations to establish the factual aspects of the article
3. broad in coverage?: yes
4. neutral point of view?: yes
5. article stability? yes
6. images?: passable

when these issues are addressed, the article can be resubmitted for consideration.  if you feel that this review is in error, feel free to take it to a ga review.  thank you for your work so far. 
— argos'dad 03:36, 13 april 2007 (utc)