facts of life redirect not appropriate
i typed in "facts of life" to go to the entry on the t.v. and it took me here. this redirect needs to be eliminated in favor of a disam page. pacian 01:08, 26 may 2005 (utc)

__toc__

i am sorry, but the idea that human sexuality is governed by instinct is hopelessly outdated. get your information straight. for instance, it does not need to take one man and one woman. a woman or a man can have sex by themselves. not everybody in this world defines themselves as man or woman. two women or two men (or three or four or more) can have sex. but the main thing is that we learn sex, we do not just instinctively do it. if you don't agree, think back to your first time. you will have to admit that you had to learn a great deal and perhaps you have since that time. can you walk on two feet (a distinctly human trait) without anybody teaching you? can you speak complex sentences (equally as human, no animal comes close to humans in the use of language) when you do not grow up in a social environment? you cannot. if you want to compare your sexuality to that of chimps, i suggest you watch chimps copulate (i can't even call it sex). if that compares to your sexuality, you have my sympathy, but i happen to last a bit longer than a few seconds.
user:nielsft12 april 2004.

i have two objections to your edit. first one is that in this version it posits an either-or situation with does not necessarily exist. it is a fallacy.
the other is that even if you hold that human sexuality is entirely learned behaviour, npov requires that you state the other opinions (which hold different degrees of intinct involvement) and give give reasons (citings etc.) why your point should be more prominents etc. etc.
--calm 16:46, 12 apr 2004 (utc)
---

i agree with 200.191.188.xxx, who added the abortion link back into the article. in fact, i'd put it right under pregnancy. but it's extremely disingenuous to ignore the link between abortion and sexuality. <>< tbc

lol. that was my opinion. :-) western society must be the first in history to de-couple sexuality from a link with pregnancy. (i'd put abortion with birth control/contraception on the page, myself, but i think we should leave it as a "