fr. jonat -- i think it would be a good idea to review how michael tinkler et al. have been adding the names of saints and kings, so that you don't accidentally create somebody twice or get people with the same name confused.  i'm still trying to figure it all out, myself!  i think (the last time i looked, that people were creating saints without the "st." -- like benedict, adalbert of prague, etc.  there are a bunch of important matildas in the middle ages -- and when you talk about any of the french/german nobility and royalty, they use the same names over and over again. jhk

i've been wondering about this too, and have opened up discussion at talk:naming conventions. -- claudine

it does get confusing. i agree to creating the pages without saint . 
the first names were a very important part, they did not just name a person, because it was a pretty name. a name was like a royal title . oftentimes the person had a different name in reality . but same first names were a family and continued the royal line. only later last names were used .
h. jonat      and yes jhk   , the previous note signed  h.j. was mine.

i think it needs to be more specific than "was associated with."  was she his mistress?  did she go to the french court and met him on the way to the loo? jhk

so, i guess by this last paragraph:

his son otto succeeded him as emperor otto i ("the great"). his second son, henry, became duke of bavaria. a third son, brun (or bruno), became archbishop of cologne. his son from his first marriage, thankmar, rebelled against his half-brother otto and was killed in battle in 936. his daughter gerberga married duke giselbert of lorraine and subsequently king louis iv of france. his youngest daughter hedwige of saxony married duke (hugh the great) of france and was the mother of hugh capet, the first capetian king of france.

......that, since henry was a decendant of charlemange, that through him, his daughter marrying in to what would soon after become the ruling family of france (the capets) that the capets are indeed in that way a long decendant of charlemange?    -tate