fr. jonat -- i think it would be a good idea to review h ok well henry waz a great king ow michael tinkler et al. have been adding the names of saints and kings, so that you don't accidentally create somebody twice or get people with the same name confused.  i'm still trying to figure it all out, myself!  i think (the last time i looked, that people were creating saints without the "st." -- like benedict, adalbert of prague, etc.  there are a bunch of important matildas in the middle ages -- and when you talk about any of the french/german nobility and royalty, they use the same names over and over again. jhk

i've been wondering about this too, and have opened up discussion at talk:naming conventions. -- claudine

it does get confusing. i agree to creating the pages without saint . 
the first names were a very important part, they did not just name a person, because it was a pretty name. a name was like a royal title . oftentimes the person had a different name in reality . but same first names were a family and continued the royal line. only later last names were used .
h. jonat      and yes jhk   , the previous note signed  h.j. was mine.

i think it needs to be more specific than "was associated with."  was she his mistress?  did she go to the french court and met him on the way to the loo? jhk

so, i guess by this last paragraph:

his son otto succeeded him as emperor otto i ("the great"). his second son, henry, became duke of bavaria. a third son, brun (or bruno), became archbishop of cologne. his son from his first marriage, thankmar, rebelled against his half-brother otto and was killed in battle in 936. his daughter gerberga married duke giselbert of lorraine and subsequently king louis iv of france. his youngest daughter hedwige of saxony married duke (hugh the great) of france and was the mother of hugh capet, the first capetian king of france.

......that, since henry was a decendant of charlemange, that through him, his daughter marrying in to what would soon after become the ruling family of france (the capets) that the capets are indeed in that way a long decendant of charlemange?    -tate

 proper grammar please 

the following sentence is grammatically incorrect:

he appears in return to castle wolfenstein when the nazi tryning wake him from the death so we can win the war. he is the last boss.

not to mention very biased. "we"? in addition, shouldn't the title be more formal, as "henry i of germany", just as frederick barbarossa's article is called "frederick i, holy roman emperor".
-alex, 12.220.157.93 07:55, 22 january 2006 (utc)

henry's parents

anyone have any insight into henry's parents?  this page says they were otto the illustrious and hedwiga, a descendent of charlemange, but otto's page says he married hathui, a daughter of a duke of austria.  was hedwiga otto's mistress, though that's not so likely, i suppose, if she were of "royal" blood.  i'll question this on otto's talk page too, since it's the same question for him, but backwards, i guess. lindsay h. 08:45, 26 august 2006 (utc)
he was the third son of otto the illustrious and hathui (hedwige), daughter of henry of franconia. neither was of royal blood. srnec 15:01, 16 may 2007 (utc)

 wrong picture, again 

the "bamberg horseman" or "bambergian knight" seems to be a multiple personage: he portrays henry i and his son otto the great at the same time. wikipedia says so.

indeed the historians don´t know exactly which person is depicted; maybe it is henry ii who founded the diocese bamberg. certainly neither henry the fowler nor otto the great are personified.

alfred e. neander 19:05, 27 november 2006 (utc)

 article moved 

henry i aka "the fowler" , "heinrich der vogler": 

it is a legend that a delegation of german tribes met henry in the woods to offer him the king´s crown while he was bird-hunting. the sport of catching birds in traps was regarded as a pleasure of the common man, not of noblemen. so the picture of henry as "the fowler" shows him as a rustic, vital man, a future king of the common people, it became quite popular in the 19th century.

there are still several (!) places of the legendary event, e.g. the "finkenherd" in quedlinburg.

maybe henry i was busy with hunting birds when the delegation came, maybe he wasn´t. maybe there never was a delegation, at least he was elected just by the franconians and his own people, the saxons.

as a matter of fact, henry was the first king of his name to be king, and should be mentioned by his regnal name. even in germany he is better kown as heinrich i., and less as  heinrich der vogler.

alfred e. neander 19:04, 27 november 2006 (utc)

strangely enough, the most popular poem praising henry as a fowler oder vogler ("herr heinrich sitzt am vogelherd") was written by johann nepomuk vogl, and one of the pictures portraying him as bird-hunter was painted by hermann vogel. coincidence?

alfred e. neander 19:40, 27 november 2006 (utc)