in later greek mythology, hecate (or hekate; greek ἑκάτη hekátē) was scarcely more than the goddess of witchcraft and sorcery. she was not usually portrayed at all, though she was described as having three heads: one dog, one serpent and one horse. she had a special role at three-way crossroads , where the greeks set poles with masks of each of her heads facing different directions: roman mythology also saw her as the goddess of the trivia "the three ways", a folk belief, whether celtic or roman, that survived into the 7th century ce among the pagans of flanders. there eligius was wont to remind his recently converted flock "no christian should make or render any devotion to the gods of the trivium, where three roads meet, to the fanes or the rocks, or springs or groves or corners" (for details, see druid). 

mythology
hecate was never incorporated among the olympian gods. she remained a goddess of women's religion, a help in childbirth. in late imagery she also has two ghostly dogs as servants by her side. in the magical papyri of ptolemaic egypt, she is called the bitch and the she-wolf, and her presence is signified by the barking of dogs.

a version of hecate has been appropriated by wicca and other modern magic-practising religions.

in the earliest records of her, hecate bears little resemblance to the night-walking crone. hesiod records that she was among the offspring of gaia and uranus, the earth and sky. in theogony he ascribed to hecate such wide-ranging and fundamental powers, that it is hard to resist seeing such a deity as a figuration of the great goddess, though as a good olympian hesiod ascribes her powers as the "gift" of zeus:
"hecate whom zeus the son of cronos honoured above all. he gave her splendid gifts, to have a share of the earth and the unfruitful sea. she received honour also in starry heaven, and is honoured exceedingly by the deathless gods.... the son of cronos did her no wrong nor took anything away of all that was her portion among the former titan gods: but she holds, as the division was at the first from the beginning, privilege both in earth, and in heaven, and in sea".

her gifts towards mankind are all-encompassing, hesiod tells:
"whom she will she greatly aids and advances: she sits by worshipful kings in judgement, and in the assembly whom she will is distinguished among the people. and when men arm themselves for the battle that destroys men, then the goddess is at hand to give victory and grant glory readily to whom she will. good is she also when men contend at the games, for there too the goddess is with them and profits them: and he who by might and strength gets the victory wins the rich prize easily with joy, and brings glory to his parents. and she is good to stand by horsemen, whom she will: and to those whose business is in the grey discomfortable sea, and who pray to hecate and the loud-crashing earth-shaker, easily the glorious goddess gives great catch, and easily she takes it away as soon as seen, if so she will. she is good in the byre with hermes to increase the stock. the droves of kine and wide herds of goats and flocks of fleecy sheep, if she will, she increases from a few, or makes many to be less".

hecate was carefully attended:
"for to this day, whenever any one of men on earth offers rich sacrifices and prays for favour according to custom, he calls upon hecate. great honour comes full easily to him whose prayers the goddess receives favourably, and she bestows wealth upon him; for the power surely is with her".

hesiod emphasizes that hecate was an only child, the daughter of asteria, a star-goddess who was the sister of leto, (the mother of artemis and apollo). grandmother of the three cousins was phoebe the ancient titaness who personified the moon. hecate was a reappearance of phoebe, a moon goddess herself, who appeared in the dark of the moon.   

her power resembles that of sorcery, for medea, who was a priestess of hecate, used witchcraft, apparently under the guidance of the goddess, in order to handle magic herbs and poisons with skill, and to be able to stay the course of rivers, or check the paths of the stars and the moon. 

yet hecate has been called "tender-hearted", probably because she was concerned with the disappearance of persephone, and addressed demeter with sweet words when the goddess was distressed.

 symbols
in modern days, wiccan followers of hecate associate several symbols and objects with her; though these are not her only followers. traditionally in ancient greece, she was associated with a serpentine maze around a spiral, known as hecate's wheel (the "strophalos of hecate", verse 194 of isaac preston cory's 1836 translation of the chaldean_oracles). the symbolism referred to the serpent's power of rebirth, to the labyrinth of knowledge through which hecate could lead mankind, and to the flame of life itself: "the life-producing bosom of hecate, that living flame which clothes itself in matter to manifest existence" (verse 55 of cory's translation of the chaldean_oracles).

objects
traditionally, hecate is represented as carrying torches, very often has a knife , and may appear holding a rope, a key, a phial, flowers or a pomegranate. 

the torch is obviously a symbol of the light that illuminates the darkness, as the greeks secured hecate in her role as the bringer of wisdom. her knife represents her role as midwife in cutting the umbilical cord (possibly symbolized by the rope), as well as severing the link between the body and spirit at death. this may be the origin of the traditional ritual knives of witches. the key is significant to hecate's role as gatekeeper, being the one who could open the doors to sacred knowledge. the orphic hymns list her as the "keybearing queen of the entire cosmos." the pomegranate was seen by the ancient greeks as the fruit of the underworld, though it was also used as a love-gift between greek men and women. this may be because a pomegranate was eaten by persephone, binding her to the underworld and to hades.

important to note is the similarity of symbols and objects held by hecate and other dark-mother-goddesses the world over. most often, symbols like the knife and rope represented the dark mother's ability to cut loose the bonds of the physical realm, thus showing her as midwife and nurse not only to children but to the dying as well. 

animals
all wild animals are sacred to hecate. creatures of darkness, such as ravens, owls, and snakes represent her the most.  dragons have been included in this list more recently, but are not a traditional greek association with this goddess. several images of hecate show her holding a snake because snakes have long been connected with chthonic powers and the powers of life, death, and rebirth. 

the dog is the animal most commonly associated with hecate. she was sometimes called the 'black she-dog' and black dogs were once sacrificed to her in purification rituals. at colophon in thrace, hecate might be manifest as a dog. the sound of barking dogs was the first sign of her approach in greek and roman literature. her festival in mid-august, celebrated by sacrificing black bitches to ward off the stormy season, gave rise to the expression "the dog-days of summer". the frog, significantly a creature that can cross between two elements, is also sacred to hecate, and to the egyptian goddess hekat. as a triple goddess, she sometimes appears with three heads-one of a dog, horse, bear or dog, snake or lion.

during the medieval period in western europe, hecate was reverenced by witches who adopted parts of her mythos as their goddess of sorcery. because hecate had already been much maligned by the late roman period, christians of the era found it easy to blacken and villify her image. thus were all her creatures also considered "creatures of darkness"; however, the history of creatures such as ravens, night-owls, snakes, scorpions, asses, bats, horses, bears, and lions as her creatures is not always a dark and frightening one. while hecate is a dark goddess, one must take care not to give too much credit to the stories her detractors choose to tell. (for more, please see jacob rabinowitz's work, "the rotting goddess".)

plants and herbs 
the yew, cypress, hazel, black poplar and willow are all sacred to hecate. the leaves of the black poplar are dark on one side and light on the other, symbolizing the boundary between the worlds. the yew has long been associated with the underworld. 

the yew has strong associations with death as well as rebirth. a poison prepared from the seeds was used on arrows, and yew wood was commonly used to make bows and dagger hilts. the potion in hecate's cauldron contains 'slips of yew'. yew berries carry hecate's power, and can bring wisdom or death. the seeds are highly poisonous, but the fleshy, coral-colored 'berry' surrounding it is not. if prepared correctly, the berry can cause visual hallucinations. (reference was requested for this: there are many books to cite, but the best would be "witchcraft medecine" by ratsch et al. see below.)

many other herbs and plants are associated with hecate, including garlic, almonds, lavender, myrrh, mugwort, cardamon, mint, dandelion, hellebore, and lesser celandine. several poisons and hallucinogens are linked to hecate, including belladonna, hemlock, mandrake, aconite (known as hecateis), and opium poppy. many of hecate's plants were those that can be used shamanistically to achieve varyings states of consciousness.

for more on this subject, there is a brilliant work by muller-ebeling, ratsch, and storl named "witchcraft medecine". it can be difficult to get but it is well worth the effort.

festivals
hecate was worshipped by both the greeks and the romans who had their own festivals dedicated to her. according to ruickbie (2004:19) the greeks observed two sacred days, one on the 13th of august and one on the 30th of november, whilst the romans observed the 29th of every month as her sacred day.

hecate in later literature

hecate makes an appearance in william shakespeare's tragedy macbeth (c.1606); she is represented as a goddess or demon who commands the three witches. there is some evidence to suggest that the scene was not written by shakespeare, but was added during a revision by thomas middleton, who used material from his own play the witch (1615).

more recently, hecate has appeared in mike mignola's hellboy comics, as well as being heavily mentioned in the popular tv series,"buffy the vampire slayer" by the wiccas.

 