hawala (also known as hundi) is an informal value transfer system used primarily in the middle east, africa and asia. 

its origins are not entirely clear, but it is believed to have been used first in the financing of long-distance trade in the early medieval period on trading routes such as the silk road, the eastern mediterranean and the indian ocean. hawala is mentioned in texts of islamic jurisprudence as early as the 8th century. in south asia, it appears to have developed into a fully-fledged money market instrument, which was only gradually replaced by the instruments of the formal banking system in the first half of the 20th century. today hawala is probably used mostly for migrant workers' remittances to their countries of origin.

in the most basic variant of the hawala system, money is transferred via a network of hawala brokers, or hawaladars. a customer approaches a hawala broker in one city and gives a sum of money to be transferred to a recipient in another, usually foreign, city. the hawala broker calls another hawala broker in the recipient's city, gives disposition instructions of the funds (usually minus a small commission), and promises to settle the debt at a later date.

the unique feature of the system is that no promissory instruments are exchanged between the hawala brokers; the transaction takes place entirely on the honor system. as the system does not depend on the legal enforceability of claims, it can operate even in the absence of a legal and juridical environment.
no records are produced of individual transactions; only a running tally of the amount owed one broker by the other is kept. settlements of debts between hawala brokers can take a variety of forms, and need not take the form of direct cash transactions. 

in addition to commissions, hawala brokers often earn their profits through bypassing official exchange rates. generally the funds enter the system in the source country's currency and leave the system in the recipient country's currency. as settlements often take place without any foreign exchange transactions, they can be made at (black) market rates rather than official rates. 

hawala is attractive to customers because it provides a fast, convenient and safe transfer of funds, usually with a far lower commission than that charged by banks. its advantages are most pronounced when the receiving country applies distortive exchange rate regulations (as has been the case for many typical receiving countries such as pakistan or egypt) or when the banking system in the receiving country is less complex (e.g. due to differences in legal environment in places such as afghanistan, yemen, somalia).

furthermore, the transfers are informal and not effectively regulated by governments, which is a major advantage to customers with tax, currency control, immigration, or other legal concerns. for the same reasons, governments disfavor the system, and accusations have been made in recent years that terrorist funding often changes hands through hawala networks.

hundis (the bill of exchange) 
it can also be noted that hundis are also referred to legal financial instruments evolved on the indian sub-continent. these were used in trade and credit transactions they were used as remittance instruments for the purpose of transfer of funds from one place to another. in the era of bygone kings and the british raj these hundis served as travellers cheques. they were also used as credit instruments for borrowing and as bills of exchange for trade transactions.
technically, a hundi is an unconditional order in writing made by a person directing another to pay a certain sum of money to a person named in the order. hundis being a part of informal system have no legal staus now and these were not covered under the negotiable instruments act, 1881. they were mostly used as cheques by indigenous bankers.

hawala after september 11 incident

after the september 11 incident, the american government suspected that some hawala brokers may have helped terrorist organizations to transfer money to fund their activities. the 9/11 commission report has since confirmed that the bulk of the funds used to finance the assault on the twin towers were not sent through the hawala system, but rather by inter-bank wire transfer to the suntrust bank in florida, where two of the conspirators had opened a personal account. however as a result of intense pressure from the us authorities, widespread efforts are currently being made to introduce systematic anti-money laundering initiatives on a global scale, the better to curb the activities of the financiers of terrorism and those engaged in laundering the profits of drug smuggling. whether these initiatives will have the desired effect of curbing such activities has yet to be seen; although a number of hawala networks have been closed down, and a number of hawaladars have been successfully prosecuted for money laundering, there is little sign that these actions have brought the authorities any closer to identifying and arresting a significant number of terrorists or drug smugglers.

in november, 2001, the bush administration froze the assets of al barakat, a somali remittance hawala company used primarily by the large somali diaspora. many of its agents in several countries were initially arrested, though later freed after no concrete evidence against them was found. many of them still have their assets frozen.

hawala have been made illegal in some states of the us and other countries as they are seen to be a form of money laundering and terrorist funding.

