 for the state of mind see hypnosis.

hypnotic drugs induce sleep (which differentiates them from the sedative category), used in the treatment of insomnia and in surgical anesthesia. often the treatment of insomnia will not begin with drugs at all. since many hypnotic drugs are habit-forming, a physician will usually recommend alternative sleeping patterns, sleep hygiene, and exercise before prescribing medication for sleep, due to a large number of factors known to disturb the human sleep pattern.

benzodiazepines
benzodiazepines are the most well known and most frequently prescribed hypnotic medication presently. although there use in recent years is being increasingly replaced by the newer nonbenzodiazepine hypnotic drugs and the supplement melatonin. they are effective in the short term but with long term use beyond 1 - 2 weeks tolerance to their hypnotic effects develops thus making them ineffective for long term use. they are also a cause of hospital admissions especially in the elderly who are more sensitive to their effects. a further problem is a benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome can develop upon their discontinuation characterised by rebound insomnia, anxiety, confusion, disorientation, insomnia, and perceptual disturbances. prescription hypnotics are therefore best limited to short term use to avoid tolerance and drug dependence and the adverse effects of long term use.

benzodiazepines tend to exert their hypnotic effects at high dosage compared to the more moderate dosage needed for anxiolytic effects to be felt. the downside of the hypnotic properties of benzodiazepines is that they actually worsen the sleep architecture and thus the quality of sleep.

examples
these drugs include:

 barbiturates
 opioids
 benzodiazepines
 estazolam
 flunitrazepam
 midazolam
 nitrazepam
 temazepam
 triazolam
 nonbenzodiazepines
 zolpidem
 zaleplon
 zopiclone
 eszopiclone
 antihistamines
 diphenhydramine
 doxylamine
 hydroxyzine
 promethazine
 gamma-hydroxybutyric acid (xyrem)
 glutethimide
 chloral hydrate
 ethchlorvynol
 levomepromazine
 chlormethiazole
 melatonin, a hormone, can work as a hypnotic if taken 30-90 minutes before usual bedtime.
 alcohol is also used as a hypnotic drug, though not medically. to quote the british national formulary: "alcohol is a poor hypnotic because its diuretic action interferes with sleep during the latter part of the night. alcohol also disturbs sleep patterns, and so can worsen sleep disorders"

