 helen adams keller  (june 27, 1880 – june 1, 1968) was a deafblind american author, activist and lecturer. 

helen keller was born in tuscumbia, alabama. her disabilities were caused by a fever in february, 1882 when she was 19 months old. her loss of ability to communicate at such an early developmental age was very traumatic for her and her family.

biography

childhood
keller was born at an estate called ivy green, on june 27, 1880, to parents captain arthur h. keller and kate adams keller. she was not born blind and deaf, but was actually a typical, healthy infant. it was not until nineteen months later that she came down with an illness that the doctors described as "an acute congestion of the stomach and the brain" which could have possibly been scarlet fever or meningitis. the illness did not last for a particularly long time, but it left her deaf and blind. by age seven she had invented over sixty different signs that she could use to communicate with her family. 

in 1886, her mother kate keller was inspired by an account in charles dickens' american notes of the successful education of another deaf/blind child, laura bridgman, and travelled to a specialist doctor in baltimore for advice. he put her in touch with local expert alexander graham bell, who was working with deaf children at the time. bell advised the couple to contact the perkins institute for the blind, the school where bridgman had been educated, which was then located in south boston, boston, massachusetts. the school delegated teacher and former student, anne sullivan, herself visually impaired and then only 20 years old, to try to open up helen's mind. it was the beginning of a 49-year-long period of working together. 

sullivan demanded and got permission from helen's father to isolate the girl from the rest of the family in a little house in their garden. her first task was to instill discipline in the spoiled girl. helen's big breakthrough in communication came one day when she realized that the motions her teacher was making on her palm, while running cool water over her palm from a pump, symbolized the idea of "water" and nearly exhausted sullivan demanding the names of all the other familiar objects in her world (including her prized doll).

in 1890, ten-year-old helen keller was introduced to the story of ragnhild kaata - a deafblind norwegian girl who had learned to speak. ragnhild kaata's success inspired helen - she wanted to learn to speak as well. anne was able to teach helen to think intelligibly and to speak, using the tadoma method: touching the lips of others as they spoke, feeling the vibrations, and spelling of alphabetical characters in the palm of helen's hand. she also learned to read english, french, german, greek, and latin in braille.

thumb|right|200px|helen keller, graduation from radcliffe college, c. 1904
education
in 1888, helen attended the perkins school for the blind. in 1894, helen and anne moved to new york city to attend the wright-humason school for the deaf. 

in 1898 they returned to massachusetts and helen entered the cambridge school for young ladies before gaining admittance, in 1900, to radcliffe college. in 1904 at the age of 24, helen graduated from radcliffe cum laude, becoming the first deaf and blind person to graduate from a college.

her dogs (introduction of the akita to america)

when helen keller visited akita prefecture in japan in july 1937, she inquired about hachiko, the famed akita dog that had died in 1935.  the local she expressed that she would like to have an akita dog. an akita called kamikaze-go was given to her within a month. when kamikaze-go later died (at a young age) because of canine distemper, his older brother, kenzan-go, was presented to her as an official gift from the japanese government in july 1939.

helen keller is credited with having introduced the akita to america though kamikaze-go and his successor, kenzan-go. by 1938 a breed standard had been established and dog shows had been held, but such activities stopped after world war ii began.

helen keller wrote in the akita journal:
"if ever there was an angel in fur, it was kamikaze. i know i shall never feel quite the same tenderness for any other pet. the akita dog has all the qualities that appeal to me — he is gentle, companionable and trusty."

(sources: , , )

political activities
helen went on to become a world-famous speaker and author. she is remembered as an advocate for the  sensorially handicapped, but also supported progressive causes. she was a suffragist, a pacifist and a birth control supporter. in 1915 she founded helen keller international, a non-profit organization for preventing blindness. helen and anne sullivan traveled all over the world to over 39 countries, and made several trips to japan, becoming a favorite of the japanese people. helen keller met every u.s. president from grover cleveland to lyndon b. johnson and was friends with many famous figures including alexander graham bell, charlie chaplin and mark twain.

helen keller was a member of the socialist party and actively campaigned and wrote in support of the working classes from 1909 to 1921. she supported socialist party candidate eugene v. debs in each of his campaigns for the presidency. her political views were reinforced by visiting workers. in her words, "i have visited sweatshops, factories, crowded slums. if i could not see it, i could smell it."

newspaper columnists who had praised her courage and intelligence before she came out as a socialist now called attention to her disabilities. the editor of the brooklyn eagle wrote that her "mistakes sprung out of the manifest limitations of her development." keller responded to that editor, referring to having met him before he knew of her political views:

"at that time the compliments he paid me were so generous that i blush to remember them. but now that i have come out for socialism he reminds me and the public that i am blind and deaf and especially liable to error. i must have shrunk in intelligence during the years since i met him...oh, ridiculous brooklyn eagle! socially blind and deaf, it defends an intolerable system, a system that is the cause of much of the physical blindness and deafness which we are trying to prevent."

helen keller also joined the famous labor union, the industrial workers of the world (iww), in 1912 after she felt that parliamentary socialism was "sinking in the political bog." helen keller wrote for the iww between 1916 and 1918. in "why i became an iww," helen wrote that her motivation for activism came in part due to her concern about blindness and other disabilities:

"i was appointed on a commission to investigate the conditions of the blind. for the first time i, who had thought blindness a misfortune beyond human control, found that too much of it was traceable to wrong industrial conditions, often caused by the selfishness and greed of employers. and the social evil contributed its share. i found that poverty drove women to a life of shame that ended in blindness."

writings
in 1960, her book light in my darkness was published in which she advocated the teachings of the swedish scientist and philosopher emanuel swedenborg.  she also wrote a lengthy autobiography called the story of my life.  she wrote a total of eleven books, and authored numerous articles.

honors
on september 14, 1964, president lyndon b. johnson awarded her the presidential medal of freedom, the united states' highest civilian honor. 

the state of alabama honored keller — a native of the state — on its state quarter. the helen keller hospital was also dedicated to her.

later life
keller devoted much of her later life to raise funds for the american foundation for the blind.

death

helen keller died on june 1, 1968, at the age of 87 from natural causes at 3:35 p.m. in arcan ridge, easton, connecticut, more than 30 years after the death of anne sullivan, and was cremated in bridgeport, connecticut. some sources, including an obituary in the new york times, mistakenly said she died in westport, connecticut. the confusion arose from her use of a westport postal box for her arcan ridge estate. easton, which did not have a post office at the time, has named a middle school after one of its most famous residents. her memorial service was at washington national cathedral, where she was buried. her tomb is located in the rear of the st. joseph's chapel on the crypt level of the cathedral.

helen keller in the arts and popular culture
a silent film, deliverance (not to be mistaken for the other, much later and more famous movie deliverance which is irrelevant to keller) first told keller's story. the miracle worker, a play about how helen keller learned to communicate, was made into a movie three times. the 1962 version of the movie won academy awards for best actress in a leading role for anne bancroft who played sullivan and best actress in a supporting role for patty duke who played keller.

another recent film about helen keller's life is the miracle continues. this semi-sequel to the miracle worker recounts her college years and her early adult life. none of the early movies hint at the social activism that would become the hallmark of helen's later life, although the the walt disney company version produced in 2000 states in the credits that helen became an activist for social equality.

the hindi movie black released in 2005 was largely based on keller's story, from her childhood to her graduation.

a new documentary shining soul: helen keller's spiritual life and legacy was produced and recently released by the swedenborg foundation (2005).  the film focuses on the role played by emanuel swedenborg's spiritual theology in her life and how it inspired keller's triumph over her triple disabilities of blindness, deafness and a severe speech impediment.

in the comedy cartoon series south park helen keller's life was shown in a musical.

her life and achievements are celebrated annually in tuscumbia, alabama, her hometown, in the helen keller festival.

in the animated series family guy, the final scene of the miracle worker was shown in one episode with the characters speaking in binary.  in another episode, the character stewie played marco polo with her, while she obviously could not respond to his calls.

strangers with candy featured an episode with a scene done to mimic the 'miracle' scene of "the miracle worker." 

helen keller has been one of the favourite targets of jokes (seen by some as in poor taste) referring to her handicaps, and many collections are available on the internet .

in the "weird al" yankovic song "it's all about the pentiums", there is a lyric "you're about as useless as jpegs to helen keller". jpegs are computer picture files, which are of no use to a blind person.

keller is the fifth most admired person in the 20th century, according to gallup.

