thumb|250px|right|hop flower in a hallertau hopgarden

hops are the flowers of humulus lupulus used as a flavouring and stability agent in beer with the first documented use in the eleventh century. hops contain several characteristics very favorable to beer: (a) hops contribute a bitterness that balances the sweetness of the malt, (b) hops also contribute aromas which range from flowery to citrus to herbal and, (c) hops have an antibiotic effect that favours the activity of brewer's yeast over less desirable microorganisms. the bitterness of commercially-brewed beers is measured on the international bitterness units scale. while hop plants are grown by farmers all around the world in many different varieties, there is no major commercial use for hops other than in beer. 

history
the first documented instance of hop cultivation was in 736, in the hallertau region of present-day germany (which is today the most important production centre with about 25% of the worldwide production), although the first mention of the use of hops in brewing was in 1079. hops were introduced to british beers in the early sixteenth century, and hop cultivation began in the present-day united states in 1629.

until mechanisation (in the late 1960s for the uk), the need for massed labour at harvest time meant hop-growing had a big social impact. many of those hopping in kent were eastenders, for whom the annual migration meant not just money in the family pocket but a welcome break from the grime and smoke of london. whole families would come down on special trains and live in hoppers' huts for most of september, even the smallest children helping in the fields.

today, the principal production centres for the uk are in kent (which produces kent golding hops) and worcestershire.  other important production areas include the state of washington in the usa, belgium, germany, and the czech republic.

brewing
hop resins are composed of two main acids: alpha and beta acids.  

alpha acids have a mild antibiotic/bacteriostatic effect against gram-positive bacteria, and favour the exclusive activity of brewing yeast in the fermentation of beer. 

beta acids do not isomerise during the boil of wort, and have a negligible effect on beer flavour.  instead they contribute to beer's bitter aroma, and high beta acid hop varieties are often added at the end of the wort boil for aroma.  beta acids oxidize and oxidized beta acids form sulfur compounds such as dms (dimethyl sulfide) that can give beer off-flavours of rotten vegetables or cooked corn.

the flavour imparted by hops varies by type and use: hops boiled with the beer (known as "bittering hops") produce bitterness, while hops added to beer later impart some degree of "hop flavour" (if during the final 10 minutes of boil) or "hop aroma" (if during the final 3 minutes, or less, of boil) and a lesser degree of bitterness.  adding hops after the wort has cooled and the beer has fermented is known as "dry hopping", and adds hop aroma, but no bitterness. the degree of bitterness imparted by hops depends on the degree to which otherwise insoluble alpha acids (aas) are isomerized during the boil, and the impact of a given amount of hops is specified in international bitterness units. unboiled hops are only mildly bitter.  

flavours and aromas are described appreciatively using terms which include "grassy", "floral", "citrus", "spicy", and "earthy". most of the common commercial lagers have fairly low hop influence, while true pilseners should have noticeable noble hop aroma and certain ales (particularly the highly-hopped style known as india pale ale) can have high levels of bitterness.

noble hops
the term noble hops traditionally refers to four varieties of hop which are low in bitterness and high in aroma. they are the central european cultivars, 'hallertauer mittelfrueh', 'tettnanger', 'spalter', and 'saaz'. they are each named for a specific region or city in which they were first grown or primarily grown. they contain high amounts of the hop oil humulene and low amounts of alpha acids cohumulone and adhumulone, as well as lower amounts of the harsher-tasting beta acids lupulone, colupulone, and adlupulone.  humulene imparts an elegant, refined taste and aroma to beers containing it. 
 
their low relative bitterness but strong aroma are often distinguishing characteristics of european-style lager beer, such as pilsener, dunkel, and oktoberfest/märzen.  in beer, they are considered aroma hops (as opposed to bittering hops); see pilsner urquell as a classic example of the pilsener style, which showcases noble hops.

as with grapes, the land where the hops were grown affects the hops' characteristics.  much like dortmunder beer may only within the eu be labelled "dortmunder" if it has been brewed in dortmund, noble hops may only officially be considered "noble" if they were grown in the areas for which the hops varieties were named.

'tettnanger' hops come from tettnang, a small town in southern baden-württemberg in  germany. the region produces significant quantities of hops, and ships them to breweries throughout the world.

hop varieties
particular hop varieties are associated with beer styles, for example pilseners are usually brewed with european (and often czech) hop varieties such as saaz, hallertau and strissel spalt. english ales use hop varieties such as fuggle, golding and bullion. north american varieties include cascade, columbia, and willamette.

