__toc__

 homeopathy  

homeopathy or homoeopathy is a system of medicine created in 1796 by samuel hahnemann, based on his doctrine of like cures like (similia similibus curentur) the word “homeopathy” is derived from two greek words: homoios which means “similar” and pathos which means “suffering.” homeopathy's basic premise is called the “principle of similars,” and it refers to recurrent observation and experience that a medicinal substance will elicit a healing response for the specific syndrome of symptoms (or suffering) that it has been proven to cause when given in overdose to a healthy person. while it can scarcely compare in antiquity with chinese or indian medicine, homeopathy is the longest established cam to have arisen in europe. it was founded by samuel hahnemann (1755-1843), who grew up in meissen in germany, received his medical degree in erlangen in 1779, and died a millionaire in paris in 1843.
the aspect of homeopathy that is not acceptable or hard to belief for some people is that the medicines are often – though by no means always – diluted to the point where there may be no molecules of original substance left. one of the leading current proposals for how such ‘ultramolecular’ dilutions work is that water is capable of storing information relating to substances with which it has previously been in contact 
 homeopathic medicine has its own sophisticated system of using substances from the plant, mineral, chemical, and animal kingdoms. this article will describe--in a modern and even futuristic fashion--this fascinating and powerful method of strengthening the body's own defense system. it is important to note that immunizations and allergy treatments are two of the very few applications in modern medicine today that actually stimulate the body's own defenses in the prevention or treatment of specific diseases, and it is not simply a coincidence that both of these treatments are derived from the homeopathic principle of similar.  — preceding unsigned comment added by taanish kumaar (talk • contribs) 06:41, 21 september 2016 (utc) 

"it is important to note that immunizations and allergy treatments are two of the very few applications in modern medicine today that actually stimulate the body's own defenses in the prevention or treatment of specific diseases, and it is not simply a coincidence that both of these treatments are derived from the homeopathic principle of similar." nonsense. immunization descends from the practice of variolation, which predates not only homeopathy, but hahnemann himself. someguy1221 (talk) 07:04, 21 september 2016 (utc)

the article currently claims "dilution typically continues well past the point where no molecules of the original substance remain." this is nonsense! the "active" substance exists somewhere. for instance, if i take 1 molecule and mix it into 10 liters of water, and then divide the water into 1 liter bottles, one of those bottles will (probably) contain that original molecule. (assuming its not absorbed, lost, nor degraded during the mixing and transfer processes). i propose this factually false statement be replaced with:"the original substance is diluted beyond any real likelihood of finding a single molecule of the original substance in a litre of the product." which is a modification of a similar sentence in the homeopathic dilution article.
also, the article fails to point out that the principle mainstream criticism is that the dilution produces a product with no active ingredient present because the enormous dilution factor. the problem with this is that this analysis fails to evaluate the likelihood that a significant amount of material may be absorbed onto the glassware's surface so that the concentration in the final product is due to surface absorption/desorption and may be many orders of magnitude higher that what is simplistically calculated. in a scenario where material preferentially is absorbed onto its container's inner wall, then the amount present in the bulk liquid will depend on the turbulence of mixing, and whether the containers are reused, among other things. 71.31.91.125 (talk) 17:23, 13 october 2016 (utc)
 the meaning is abundantly clear in context, and supported by sources. your idiosyncratic interpretation is unpersuasive. guy (help!) 18:07, 13 october 2016 (utc)

i almost feel bad pointing out that you have proven the point that you are challenging in your own example.  if the one molecule in your original 10 liters shows up in one of the liters that the original volume was distributed into, how much of the original 1 molecule is in those other nine 1 liter bottles?  with every 10 fold dilution, the bulk of the material is likely to be left behind in the 9/10 that is not carried forward into the subsequent dilution. 
as for absorption and desorption, you are arguing against one of the primary tenets of homeopathy.  hahnemann didn't say "shake and dilute and depend on material sticking to the glassware" he said "the more you dilute it, the more potent it becomes".  besides, if any substantial amount remained it would be detectable. any argument that residual active molecules are responsible for the effects of homeopathic preparations is an argument against homeopathy and an argument for classical pharmacological effects. editorformerlyknownaspuddin' (talk) 20:00, 13 october 2016 (utc)

in practice, many commercially sold homeopathic remedies are not as dilute as they are claimed to be. this can be due to a number of factors, such as materials getting absorbed by their container to form a reservoir, insufficient mixing (especially an issue with hydrophobic solutes), and outright fraud. there was a paper in the journal homeopathy about this that i had thought was mentioned somewhere in this article, but apparently not. though of course it's hard to trust anything from that journal. but i'm sure some reputable scientists have put absurdly diluted homeopathic remedies through a mass spec to see if they are actually prepared the way they are supposed to be. someguy1221 (talk) 20:26, 13 october 2016 (utc)
 whereas some are more dilute: nelsons were found not to be adding the magic to one vial in six, and their method of preparation meant that even when the magic was added, most pillules were not exposed to it. funnily enough - and i know you will find this really hard to credit - not one customer noticed the difference. guy (help!) 23:49, 13 october 2016 (utc)

never mind.  after rereading the original post, i see what the concern is.  i've just become accustomed to expecting gibberish from the anonymous ip contributors on this page and read it through too quickly.  sorry.  

agree with guy though that it is fairly clear in context. editorformerlyknownaspuddin' (talk) 01:21, 14 october 2016 (utc)

 homeopathic preparations suspected in infant death and poisonings. 

should there be some mention of this in our article?

http://www.sciencealert.com/a-homeopathic-teething-product-is-being-investigated-in-the-deaths-of-10-babies

editorformerlyknownaspuddin' (talk) 20:05, 13 october 2016 (utc)
it would seem to be backed up by the fda, at: http://www.fda.gov/forconsumers/consumerupdates/ucm230762.htm so, yes. 
leadsongdog come howl! 19:31, 17 october 2016 (utc)
 i've added a paragraph about this with info about the fda investigation, cvs (pharmacy) withdrawal of the homeopathy products from sale and hyland's discontinuation of the products in the us. at the time of writing i don't think the fda has comprehensively pinned the blame on the products, testing still ongoing etc, but given that almost exactly the same thing happened six years earlier it's a bit unfortunate. jobrodie (talk) 22:58, 17 october 2016 (utc)
 my friend  just added it. guy (help!) 23:06, 17 october 2016 (utc)