right|thumb|the university of cambridge is an institute of higher learning.

higher education is education provided by universities, vocational universities (community colleges,  liberal arts colleges, and technical colleges, etc.)  and other collegial institutions that award academic degrees, such as career colleges. post-secondary or tertiary education, also referred to as third-stage, third level education, or higher education, is the non-compulsory educational level following the completion of a school providing a secondary education, such as a high school, secondary school, or gymnasium.  tertiary education is normally taken to include undergraduate and postgraduate education, as well as vocational education and training. colleges and universities are the main institutions that provide tertiary education (sometimes known collectively as tertiary institutions). examples of institutions that provide post-secondary education are vocational schools, community colleges and universities in the united states, the tafes in australia, cegeps in quebec (canada) and the ieks in greece. they are sometimes known collectively as tertiary institutions. tertiary education generally results in the receipt of certificates, diplomas,or  academic degrees.
 
higher education includes teaching, research and social services activities of universities, and within the realm of teaching, it includes both the undergraduate level (sometimes referred to as tertiary education) and the graduate (or postgraduate) level (sometimes referred to as graduate school). in the united kingdom post-secondary education below the level of higher education is referred to as further education. higher education in that country generally involves work towards a degree-level or foundation degree qualification.

in most developed countries a high proportion of the population (up to 50%) now enter higher education at some time in their lives.  higher education is therefore very important to national economies, both as a significant industry in its own right, and as a source of trained and educated personnel for the rest of the economy.

there can be disagreement about what precisely constitutes post-secondary or tertiary education: "it is not always clear, though, what tertiary education includes. is it only that which results in a formal qualification or might it include leisure classes? in the uk, are a-levels tertiary education as they are post-compulsory but taught in school settings as well as colleges? is professional updating or on-the-job training part of tertiary education, even if it does not follow successful completion of secondary education?"analytic quality glossary

there is two types of higher education, the higher general education and the higher vocational education.

 higher general education 
higher general education and training generally takes place in a university. such education is based on theoretical expertise. higher general education might be contrasted with higher vocational education, which concentrate on  both practice and theory. a university is an institution of higher education and research, which grants degrees like bachelor's degree, master's degree and doctorates) in a variety of subjects. however, most professional education is included within higher education, and many postgraduate qualifications are strongly vocationally or professionally oriented, for example in disciplines such as law and medicine.

 higher education in sciences 

academic disciplines that may be considered to be sciences include:

mathematics
physics
natural science
music (theory)

 higher education in arts  

academic disciplines that may be considered to be arts include:

theology
humanities
social science
law
economics

 higher vocational education 

higher vocational education and training takes place at the non-university tertiary level. such education combines teaching of both practical skills and theoretical expertise. higher education differs from other forms of post-secondary education such as that offered by institutions of vocational education, which are more colloquially known as trade schools. higher vocational education might be contrasted with education in a usually broader scientific field, which might concentrate on theory and abstract conceptual knowledge. a vocational university is an institution of higher education and sometime research, which grants professional degrees like professional bachelor's degree, professional master's degree and professional doctorates) in a variety of subjects.

there is vocational universities in applied sciences and applied arts

 higher education in applied sciences 

applied science is the exact science of applying knowledge from one or more natural scientific fields to practical problems. many applied sciences can be considered forms of engineering.

academic disciplines that may be considered to be applied sciences include:
agriculture
architecture
education
engineering
family and consumer science
forestry
forensics
health sciences
library and information science
medicine
pharmaceuticals
military science 

there are also applied branches of most other sciences.

 higher education in applied arts 

 
 performing arts 

the performing arts differ from the plastic arts or visual arts insofar as the former uses the artist's own body, face, presence as a medium, and the latter uses materials such as clay, metal or paint which can be molded or transformed to create some art object. 

performing arts include: 

music (performance) see higher education in music.
opera
theatre see higher education in theatre.
film 
dance
circus arts

 plastic or visual arts 

the plastic arts or visual arts are a class of art forms, that involve the use of materials that can be moulded or modulated in some way, often in three dimensions. examples are clay, paint and plaster. arts that can be said to be plastic arts are therefore painting, sculpture, drawing, etc.

the plastic arts may refer to:

fine arts (painting, sculpture, photography)
architecture
ceramics
land art
metalworking
paper art
textile art
woodworking
film

working in higher education

universities are fairly large employers. depending on the funding, a university typically has a teacher per 3-20 students. according to the ideal of research-university, the university teaching staff is actively involved in the research of the institution. in addition, the university usually also has dedicated research staff and a considerable support staff. typically to work in higher education as a member of the academic faculty, one must first obtain a doctorate in an academic field, although some lower teaching positions require only master's degree. member of the staff or administration usually have education that is necessary for the fulfilment of their duties. depending on the university, the main administration is more or less centralized. typically most of the administrative staff works in different administrative sections, such as student affairs. in addition, there may be central support units, such as a university library which have a dedicated staff.  

the professional field involving the collection, analysis, and reporting of higher education data is called institutional research. professionals in this field can be found, in addition to universities, in e.g. state educational departments.

asia

  higher education in bangladesh
  universities and colleges in india 

europe

british universities
dutch universities
french universities
italian universities
spanish universities

north america

on september 15, 2005 the federal bureau of investigation created the national security higher education advisory board.  the board will "provide advice on the culture of higher education."  the details of how involved the fbi will be involved on campus is left ambiguous.  the board will help develop research, degree programs, course work, internships, opportunities for graduates, and consulting opportunities for faculty relating to national security.  graham spanier, president of pennsylvania state university, will chair the board.  universities involved: johns hopkins university, university of california los angeles, carnegie mellon university, university of california, san diego, texas a&m university, iowa state university, university of pennsylvania, west virginia university, massachusetts institute of technology, purdue university, university of florida, university of north carolina chapel hill, university of maryland, university of wisconsin, and university of washington. 
source:  http://www.researchfor.com

notes

