indo-european is a collective name for cultures speaking related languages, being of related traditional religions  and sharing a similar geographical origin. a patriarchal system and patrilineal inheritance, along with other cultural similarities, appear to be fundamental to the general scope.   hypothetically, these cultures arose from the expansion of an ancient people, the proto-indo-europeans, c. 4000 b.c., somewhere around the black sea region. (see indo-european religion and  indo-european languages)

the existence of the indo-europeans has been inferred by
comparative linguistics. the discovery of the genetic relationship of the various indo-european languages goes back to william jones, a british judge in india, who in 1782 observed, that,
"the sanskrit language, whatever be its antiquity, is of a wonderful structure; more perfect than the greek, more copious than the latin, and more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger affinity, both in the roots of verbs and the forms of grammar, than could possibly have been produced by accident; so strong indeed, that no philologer could examine them all three, without believing them to have sprung from some common source, which, perhaps, no longer exists."

at first, the related languages were simply compared, with no attempt at reconstruction. august schleicher was the first scholar to compose a tentative text in the extinct common source jones had predicted. the reconstructed proto-indo-european language (pie) represents, by definition, the common language of the proto-indo-europeans. in the 20th century, great progress was made due to the discovery of more language material belonging to the indo-european family, and by advances in comparative linguistics, by scholars such as ferdinand de saussure. purely linguistic research was assisted by attempts to reconstruct the culture and religion of the proto-indo-europeans by scholars such as georges dumézil.

there have been many attempts to claim that particular prehistorical cultures can be identified with the pie-speaking peoples, but all have been speculative. this is because there are no written records of pie, so the only way to identify an actual people with the language is to match the archeological remains of non-literate peoples to the supposed prehistory of known languages. this depends on reconstructing the early language, and identifying concepts in it that may be associated with particular cultures (such as the use of metals, agriculture or pastoralism, geographically distinctive plants and animals, etc).

 the search for indo european origins

the ideas of nineteenth century scholars of linguistics who first postulated the existence of the proto-indo-europeans were made during a time dominated by a imperialist and racist mind set. it was naturally assumed that the spread of the language was due to invasion by a superior aryan race into europe. these discredited ideas still have a wide popular following. they tied this european invasion into speculations about the aryan invasion of india, which would have occurred around 1500 bc. the question of where exactly was the proto-indo-european homeland from which they invaded europe and india resulted in much speculation.

in the twentieth century marija gimbutas created a modern variation on the traditional invasion theory (the kurgan hypothesis, see kurgan) in which the indo-europeans were a nomadic tribe in southern russia and expanded on horseback sometime around 2000 bc. their expansion coincided with the taming of the horse. leaving archaelogical signs of their presence (see battle-axe people), they crushed the peaceful european neolithic farmers of gimbutas's old europe. this theory in the form modified by james mallory who dated it earlier to around 4000 bc is still widely held. colin renfrew is the main propagator for a newer theory dating from 1987 in which the indo-europeans were farmers in asia minor who expanded peacefully in south east europe from around 7000 bc.

however recent developments in archaeology have caused problems for both these theories. modern archaeological evidence and improved dating techniques, indicates very strong cultural continuity in europe since the neolithic, which undermines claims of any outside invasion. the rise of archaeogenetic evidence which uses genetic analysis to trace migration patterns also added new elements to the puzzle. luigi luca cavalli-sforza, one of the first in this field, recently used genetic evidence to in some ways combine gimbatus and colin renfrew theory together. here renfrew's agricultural settlers moving north and west, partially split off to eventually became gimbatus' kurgan culture which moves into europe. 

however even more recently brian sykes extensive data shows the vast majority, that is 80%, of the genetic stock of europeans goes back to the paleolithic, tying in with the archeological data showing european continuity. yet another controversial recent study combing genetics and language locates indo european origins in anatolia supporting renfrew.

one new attempt to explain this new evidence is the paleolithic continuity theory (pct) which suggests the indo european languages actually originated in europe and have existed there since the paleolithic.

the concept of the proto-indo-europeans was exploited for political means by the nazi party (see aryan race). their very existence is also questioned by scholars who maintain that their own culture and language have always been present in the area (see indus valley civilisation, vedic civilization, aryan, and aryan invasion theory) (cf. the controversy about the rus' (people)).

