the hausdorff dimension (also: hausdorff-besicovitch dimension, capacity dimension and fractal dimension), introduced by felix hausdorff, gives a way to accurately measure the dimension of complicated sets such as fractals. the hausdorff dimension agrees with the ordinary (topological) dimension on "well-behaved sets", but it is applicable to many more sets and is not always a natural number. the hausdorff dimension should not be confused with the (similar) box-counting dimension.

suppose (x,d) is a metric space.  we define a family of metric outer measures on x using the method ii construction of outer measures due to munroe.  this is described in the article outer measure. let c be the class of all subsets of x; for each positive real number s, let ps be the function a → diam(a)s on c. hausdorff outer measure of dimension s, denoted hs is the outer measure corresponding to the function ps on c.

thus for any subset e of x

where the infimum is taken over sequences {ai}i which cover e by sets each with diameter ≤ &delta. then 

the value hs(e) can be described directly as the infimum of all h > 0 such that for all δ > 0, e can be covered by countably many closed sets of diameter ≤ δ and the sum of the s-th powers of these diameters is less than or equal to h.

theorem. hs is a metric outer measure.  thus all borel subsets of x are measurable and hs is a countably additive measure on the borel algebra.

the function s → hs(e) is non-increasing.
in fact, it turns out that for all values of s, except possibly one  hs(e) is either 0 or ∞. we say e has positive finite hausdorff dimension iff there is a real number 0<d< ∞ such that if s < d then hs(e) = ∞ and if s > d, then hs(e) = 0. if
hs(e)=0 for all positive s, then e has hausdorff dimension 0.  finally, if hs(e)=∞ for all positive s, then e has hausdorff dimension ∞ 

the hausdorff dimension is a well-defined extended real number for any set e and we always have 0 ≤ d(e) ≤ ∞.

 examples 

 the euclidean space rn has hausdorff dimension n.
 the circle s1 has hausdorff dimension 1.
 countable sets have hausdorff dimension 0.
 fractals are defined to be sets whose hausdorff dimension strictly exceeds the topological dimension. for example, the cantor set (a zerodimensional topological space) is a union of two copies of itself, each copy shrunk by a factor 1/3; this fact can be used to prove that its hausdorff dimension is ln(2)/ln(3) (see natural logarithm). the sierpinski triangle is a union of three copies of itself, each copy shrunk by a factor of 1/2; this yields a hausdorff dimension of ln(3)/ln(2).

 