the hausdorff dimension (also: hausdorff-besicovitch dimension, capacity dimension and fractal dimension), introduced by felix hausdorff, gives a way to accurately measure the dimension of complicated sets such as fractals. the hausdorff dimension agrees with the ordinary (topological) dimension on "well-behaved sets", but it is applicable to many more sets and is not always a natural number. the hausdorff dimension should not be confused with the (similar) box-counting dimension.

suppose (x,d) is a metric space.  we define a family of metric outer measures on x using the method ii construction of outer measures due to munroe and described in the article outer measure. let c be the class of all subsets of x; for each positive real number s, let ps be the function a → diam(a)s on c. hausdorff outer measure of dimension s, denoted hs is the outer measure corresponding to the function ps on c.

thus for any subset e of x

where the infimum is taken over sequences {ai}i which cover e by sets each with diameter ≤ δ. then 

the value hs(e) can be described directly as the infimum of all h > 0 such that for all δ > 0, e can be covered by countably many closed sets of diameter ≤ δ and the sum of the s-th powers of these diameters is less than or equal to h.

theorem. hs is a metric outer measure.  thus all borel subsets of x are measurable and hs is a countably additive measure on the σ-algebra of borel sets.

hausdorff measure is a lipschitz invariant in the following sense:  if d and d1 are metrics on x such that for some 0< c < ∞ and all x, y in x, 

then the corresponding hausdorff measures hs, h1s satisfy

for any borel set e.

the function s → hs(e) is non-increasing.
in fact, it turns out that for all values of s, except possibly one  hs(e) is either 0 or ∞. we say e has positive finite hausdorff dimension iff there is a real number 0<d< ∞ such that if s < d then hs(e) = ∞ and if s > d, then hs(e) = 0. if
hs(e)=0 for all positive s, then e has hausdorff dimension 0.  finally, if hs(e)=∞ for all positive s, then e has hausdorff dimension ∞ 

the hausdorff dimension is a well-defined extended real number for any set e and we always have 0 ≤ d(e) ≤ ∞.  it follows from the lipschitz property of hausdorff measure that hausdorff dimension is a lipschitz invariant.  its relation to topological properties is outlined below.

note that if m is a positive integer, the m dimensional hausdorff measure of rm is a rescaling of usual m-dimensional borel measure λm which is normalized so that the borel measure of the m-dimensional unit cube [0,1]m is 1. in fact, for any borel set e,
 

remark.  some authors adopt a slightly different definition of hausdorff measure than the one chosen here, the difference being that it is normalized in such a way that hausdorff m-dimensional measure in the case of euclidean space coincides exactly with borel measure λ. 

see the federer reference below for additional material on other fractal measures.

 examples 

 the euclidean space rn has hausdorff dimension n.
 the circle s1 has hausdorff dimension 1.
 countable sets have hausdorff dimension 0.
 fractals are defined to be sets whose hausdorff dimension strictly exceeds the topological dimension. for example, the cantor set (a zerodimensional topological space) is a union of two copies of itself, each copy shrunk by a factor 1/3; this fact can be used to prove that its hausdorff dimension is ln(2)/ln(3), which is approximately 0.63 (see natural logarithm). the sierpinski triangle is a union of three copies of itself, each copy shrunk by a factor of 1/2; this yields a hausdorff dimension of ln(3)/ln(2), which is approximately 1.58.
 the trajectory of brownian motion in dimension 2 and above has hausdorff dimension 2 almost surely.

 hausdorff dimension and topological dimension 

let x be an arbitrary separable metric space. there is a notion of topological dimension for x which is defined recursively.  it is always an integer (or +infinity) and is denoted dimtop(x).

theorem.  suppose x is non-empty.  then 

moreover

where y ranges over metric spaces homeomorphic to x.  in other words, x and y have the same underlying set of points and the metric dy of y is topologically equivalent to dx.  

these results were originally established by e. szpilrajn.  the treatment in chapter viii of the hurewicz and wallman reference is particularly recommended.

 