eo:baratofr:indede:indienno:india

the republic of india, located in the south of asia, is the second most populated country in the world and is the world's largest democracy with about a billion people and dozens of languages.

republic of india
image:india_flag_medium.png
coat of arms
(in detail)
(full size)
national motto: xxxxx
official language            xxxxx
capital                      new delhi
president abdul kalam
prime minister                   atal behari vajpayee 
area - total  - % waterranked 7th  3,287,590 km²  9.5%               
population 
 - total (2000) 
 - density                  ranked 2nd
 1,029,991,145 
 313/km² 
independence
 - declared
 - recognised                   (event xxxx)
(year)
(year)
currency                     indian rupee
time zone                    utc +5.30
national anthem              jana-gana-mana
internet tld.in
 history 
main article: history of india

india used to be a great colonial master herself, in the days of the mauryas. but this diminished with the fall of the empire and india herself became a colony of the british empire. india's wealth attracted many invaders, the muslims, the dutch, the portuguese and the british all wanted a piece of the treasures of india.

nonviolent resistance to british colonialism under mohandas gandhi and sardar vallabhbhai patel led to independence in 1947. the subcontinent was divided into the secular state of india and the smaller muslim state of pakistan. a third war between the two countries in 1971 resulted in east pakistan becoming the separate nation of bangladesh. fundamental concerns in india include the ongoing dispute with pakistan over kashmir, massive overpopulation, environmental degradation, extensive poverty, and ethnic strife, all this despite impressive gains in economic investment and output.

 politics 
main article: politics of india

 states and territories 
main article: states of india

india is subdivided into 28 states and 7 union territories, marked by a *:

 andaman and nicobar islands *
 andhra pradesh
 arunachal pradesh
 assam
 bihar
 chandigarh *
 chattisgarh
 dadra and nagar haveli *
 daman and diu *
 delhi *
 goa
 gujarat
 haryana
 himachal pradesh
 jammu and kashmir
 jharkhand
 karnataka
 kerala
 lakshadweep *
 madhya pradesh
 maharashtra
 manipur
 meghalaya
 mizoram
 nagaland
 orissa
 pondicherry *
 punjab
 rajasthan
 sikkim
 tamil nadu
 tripura
 uttaranchal
 uttar pradesh
 west bengal

 geography 
main article geography of india

image:indiamap.jpg

 economy 
main article economy of india

india's economy encompasses traditional village farming, modern agriculture, handicrafts, a wide range of modern industries, and a multitude of support services. about a quarter of the population is still too poor to be able to afford an adequate diet. india's international payments position remained strong in 2001 with adequate foreign exchange reserves, and moderately depreciating nominal exchange rates. growth in manufacturing output has slowed, and electricity shortages continue in many regions. india has large numbers of well-educated people skilled in the english language; india is a major exporter of software services and software workers.

 demographics 
main article: demographics of india

 miscellaneous topics 

 communications in india
 transportation in india
 military of india
 foreign relations of india
 religions of india
 indian film

 