removed:

 [...] - persons disinclined to sexual behavior with members of the opposite sex have been at a considerable reproductive disadvantage. 

this is based on some unmentioned assumptions and also unnecessary to the article in general. --robbe

i disagree on both counts but not strongly enough to fight about it. however, i am including the complete text here for context:

"heterosexuality is romantic or sexual desire for, or sexual activities with, persons of the opposite sex. it is overwhelmingly the most common sexual preference or orientation. 

this is not surprising when we consider that heterosexual behavior (coitus) is responsible for the reproduction of human beings - persons disinclined to sexual behavior with members of the opposite sex have been at a considerable reproductive disadvantage." 

surely there's *someone* more recent than kinsey to refer to?  --michaeltinkler

yes, surely, but i don't know them so i wrote about what i know. kinsey should still be referenced as the researcher who first explored the subject, though. probably any extended discussion of sexual orientation belongs there. --dmerrill

"these studies have been discredited, because they relied on prison inmates, hardly a representative sample of the general population."

ok. let's see the ref. :-)

ok, trying to avoid an editing war here, but why do you insist on changing the citation style when it is taken directly from wikipedia: cite your sources?  also, heterosexualism, despite the link (which opens to the page homosexuality) is not a word.  try looking it up.  exploding boy 11:17, feb 9, 2004 (utc)

 i seen it (ie., wiki:cys; that's a guide ... not rules in granite) ... the hyperlink is still there ... but it's inline ... instead of "text : hyperlink" ... it's "hyperlinked text" ... the link is still there (and does the same thing without the clutter) ... as to the heterosexualism, it is linked by "list of isms". some editor(s) thought to list it and redirect it here (not homosexuality) ... so, it probably is used by ppl (i didn't know about ... and it's not probably not in the oed (oxford english dictionary))... jdr 

eta: i have found the word heterosexualism in one place.  it's so rare i think it needs a note to that effect.
 i rv'ed the qualifiaction ... it's not needed. jdr

heterossexualism???
does this word exist? looks like a disease! (and according to my gay brother, it is) i dont like it at all, cant we negotiate it? muriel 12:06, 9 feb 2004 (utc)

 yes it does exist ... i was browsin' and found the def:

 heterosexualism: an ideology that holds that heterosexuality is the only viable and valid expression of human sexuality. (politics and sexual definitions)

i'll modify it in the article to reflect this link... sincerely, jdr [ps. disease? ymmv on that =-]

i've been writing for the gay press for 25 years and i've never heard the word heterosexualism - as opposed to heterosexism, which has been around for a while. adam 12:27, 9 feb 2004 (utc)

i've never heard it either, and it's a ridiculous word, but i have found at least one reference to it.  i've redirected the "heterosexualism" page (which used to redirect to heterosexuality) to "heteronormativity." exploding boy 13:00, feb 9, 2004 (utc)

 ridiculous? that is your pov ...
 i corrected your redirect ... it belongs here [being closely tied to this article). heteronormativity is different (made a contrast wlnk though). jdr

you "corrected" my redirect?  may i ask why?  according to the definitions given, heterosexualism basically is heteronormativity.  it's certainly not synonymous with heterosexuality. exploding boy 13:40, feb 9, 2004 (utc)

yea ... that is one definition (1st one i found and cited because of that)  ... but there are other (more genreral) ... you can find them through a search. it is similar but not "is". jdr 13:46, 9 feb 2004 (utc)

also, i just followed the link you provided; the definition there is not the same as that given on the page, and furthermore that webpage is highly suspect as a source.  first, it's titled "#1 blonde jokes," second, the definitions it provides range from slightly off to wildly incorrect (eg: "bisexual: possessing characteristics of both sexes " and "transsexuality: sexual attraction directed toward playing or mimicking the role of a person of the opposite sex; erotic acts for the purpose of gaining sexual excitement or gratification while pretending to be a person of the opposite sex"). exploding boy 13:48, feb 9, 2004 (utc)

either way, "heterosexualism" and "heterosexuality" are not the same; heterosexualism should not redirect to heterosexuality.exploding boy 13:49, feb 9, 2004 (utc)

look reddi, i dont understand your annoying opinion acronyms like ymmv and the likes, but i hpe that with your comment above you are not implying that i have some sort of prejudice. i said that it looks like a name of a disease and i dont like it. and i think it should not to this page, basing on the given definition. muriel 10:10, 11 feb 2004 (utc)

i'd also one again like to register my objection to the word "heterosexualism," the link you provided for its definition (see my post above) which does not belong in a scholarly article, and the fact that "heterosexualism" redirects to "heterosexual" rather than "heteronormativity." exploding boy 10:57, feb 11, 2004 (utc)